Robotics and Autonomous Systems 73 (2015) 78–90

Contents lists available at ScienceDirect

Robotics and Autonomous Systems
journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/robot

Tele-impedance based assistive control for a compliant
knee exoskeleton
Nikos Karavas a,∗ , Arash Ajoudani a,b , Nikos Tsagarakis a , Jody Saglia a , Antonio Bicchi a,b ,
Darwin Caldwell a
a

Istituto Italiano di Tecnologia, Italy

b

Interdepartmental Research Centre ‘‘E. Piaggio’’, University of Pisa, Italy

highlights
•
•
•
•

We propose a tele-impedance based assistive control for a knee exoskeleton.
An EMG-driven biomechanical model estimates the net torque and joint stiffness trend index.
The outputs of the model are used to derive the trajectory and stiffness of the exoskeleton’s impedance controller.
The exoskeleton can generate assistive actions that are volitionally controlled by the user’s muscle activity.

article

info

Article history:
Available online 16 October 2014
Keywords:
Lower limb exoskeleton
Assistive robotics
Impedance control
Stiffness augmentation

abstract
This paper presents a tele-impedance based assistive control scheme for a knee exoskeleton device. The
proposed controller captures the user’s intent to generate task-related assistive torques by means of
the exoskeleton in different phases of the subject’s normal activity. To do so, a detailed musculoskeletal
model of the human knee is developed and experimentally calibrated to best match the user’s kinematic
and dynamic behavior. Three dominant antagonistic muscle pairs are used in our model, in which
electromyography (EMG) signals are acquired, processed and used for the estimation of the knee joint
torque, trajectory and the stiffness trend, in real time. The estimated stiffness trend is then scaled and
mapped to a task-related stiffness interval to agree with the desired degree of assistance. The desired
stiffness and equilibrium trajectories are then tracked by the exoskeleton’s impedance controller. As
a consequence, while minimum muscular activity corresponds to low stiffness, i.e. highly transparent
motion, higher co-contractions result in a stiffer joint and a greater level of assistance. To evaluate the
robustness of the proposed technique, a study of the dynamics of the human–exoskeleton system is
conducted, while the stability in the steady state and transient condition is investigated. In addition,
experimental results of standing-up and sitting-down tasks are demonstrated to further investigate the
capabilities of the controller. The results indicate that the compliant knee exoskeleton, incorporating the
proposed tele-impedance controller, can effectively generate assistive actions that are volitionally and
intuitively controlled by the user’s muscle activity.
© 2014 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

1. Introduction
Powered exoskeletons have undergone continuous technological development over the past few years and have found various
applications from military use to patient rehabilitation. Military
exoskeletons’ purpose is to augment the soldier’s muscular force

∗ Correspondence to: Harvard University, 60 Oxford Street, Suite 403, 02138
Cambridge, MA, United States.
E-mail address: nkaravas@seas.harvard.edu (N. Karavas).
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.robot.2014.09.027
0921-8890/© 2014 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

and endurance in carrying heavy loads [1]. On the other hand, rehabilitation exoskeletons aim at recovering the neuromusculoskeletal function of stroke or post-surgical patients [2–4], while assistive
exoskeletons can assist elderly or individuals with mobility disorders during demanding, in terms of power, motion tasks [5–7].
Independently from the use, exoskeletons are robotic devices
that are worn by the humans. Therefore, the application of forces
in an appropriate manner as regards the timing, magnitude,
direction and location on the human body, is a prerequisite [8]. In
other words, the exoskeleton should effectively assist the natural
human motion ensuring the safety and comfort of the user, and

N. Karavas et al. / Robotics and Autonomous Systems 73 (2015) 78–90

that his/her agility is not deteriorated. To address this immense
challenge researchers have incorporate the detection of the user’s
intent into the control of exoskeletons. Common approach is to
use joint angles to infer about the subject’s posture [9], or ground
reaction forces measurements to estimate the desired torques
with an inverse dynamic model [1]. In [10] authors proposed
an observer to correct the desired joint torques computed from
the ground reaction forces. However, due to the increased need
in exoskeletons for achieving desired response to disturbance,
the integration of biological signals into the exoskeleton control
has gained a lot of attention by many researchers over the last
decade [6,11,12].
Furthermore, as exoskeletons not simply cooperate with the
humans but assist or supplement the human motion (e.g replace
muscle’s work), it has been deemed imperative to develop exoskeletons that exhibit biological behavior and performance [13].
This is mainly related to the physical properties of the musculotendinous unit acting on the human joints and their resultant
impedance. In particular, several biomechanical studies of human
movement report that the impedance profiles of the human joints
vary substantially during motion [14,15]. Therefore, exoskeletons
should accordingly respond and adapt to these impedance profiles [16]. In this manner, their use becomes more effective and intuitive, while the agility and comfort of the user wearing the device
are significantly increased.
To this end, researchers have put a lot of effort into employing
variable impedance systems into exoskeletons, orthoses or prostheses that will be able to produce naturally human-like mechanics [17,18]. However, the planning of the impedance profiles of
these devices has been deemed a highly challenging task and yet
relies on indirect approaches such as modeling, gait phase detection, or off-line learning and optimization techniques. For instance,
in [19] the active impedance of an ankle orthosis is modulated during the gait cycle using a finite-state machine that is triggered by
ground reaction forces and joint angles. Additionally, the authors
in [20] select to adjust the knee joint impedance of an assistive
exoskeleton during motion with the target stiffness, damping and
inertia parameters being identified based on the Recursive Least
Square (RLS) method. Furthermore, variable-impedance assistance
has been implemented in robot-aided gait rehabilitation to achieve
patient-cooperative training and more interactive robotic therapies, that lead to an enhanced rehabilitation outcome [21,22]. In
the latter an adaptive impedance controller utilizes an inversedynamics based estimation of the user’s torque in order to adapt
robotic assistance.
Alternatively to these approaches, which are constrained either
by highly nonlinear models [20,22] or by optimization criteria
problems [23], in this series of preliminary case studies we propose
to select and control the impedance of the exoskeleton joint
based on real-time stiffness measurements of the corresponding
human joint. The current manuscript is an extended and enriched
version of the initial work in [24] to provide an exhaustive
analysis and discussion especially on the proposed control scheme
and its experimental evaluation. Particular attention is paid to
the dynamics of the physical human–exoskeleton system, the
performance of the controller in the frequency domain, and the
stability of the closed-loop system both in steady state and timevarying condition.
The presented control method requires modeling of musculoskeletal bio-feedbacks such as muscular forces-moments. This
can be addressed with two general approaches. Inverse dynamic
methods, investigate this problem by means of measurements of
the joint positions and applied external forces. However, several
drawbacks are attributed to such techniques [25]. For instance, the
muscles acting on each joint are grouped and divided to agonist
and antagonist blocks and consequently, the external flexion and

79

extension moments are balanced. Therefore, these methods are not
reliable enough for individual estimation of muscular forces since a
priori assumptions are made on the role of individual muscles during the optimization of a predefined cost function [26]. The problem grows when modeling complex tasks which combine highly
nonlinear muscle activation and contraction dynamics and geometry variations. As a result, a second group of general solutions
which are associated with forward dynamic approaches have been
proposed. In these methods, neural commands are extracted and
fed to the detailed neuro-musculoskeletal model of the limbs [27].
Therefore, an EMG-driven musculoskeletal model of the knee
joint has been developed that blends results of different biomechanical studies. The outputs of the model are then exploited in
real-time by the impedance controller implemented in the exoskeleton joint. Regarding the hardware, a knee exoskeleton was
used for this study that is a passively compliant device demonstrating inherently soft interaction based on the series elastic actuation
(SEA) principle [2,8]. We envisage this assistive device combined
with the proposed control to assist either individuals with limited
physical capabilities (e.g. elderly) during their activities of daily living, or healthy people during repetitive tasks at work for reducing
their average muscle forces. However, the presented control algorithm could be eventually used under conditions (i.e. sound muscle
excitations) in a rehabilitation setting for improved patient-driven
therapies.
The rest of the paper is structured as follows. Section 2 presents
the musculoskeletal model of the knee joint while Section 3
discusses the knee model identification and calibration. Section 4
describes the exoskeleton hardware and Section 5 introduces the
tele-impedance based assistive control scheme. Section 6 discusses
the dynamics of the physical system and the stability of the
proposed control, while Section 7 demonstrates the experimental
trials. Moreover, Section 8 provides a general discussion on this
work and Section 9 addresses the conclusions.
2. EMG-driven musculoskeletal model
This section describes mathematically the electromyographydriven musculoskeletal model of the human knee joint, which
is used to account for the net torque and joint stiffness trend
index. Three antagonistic muscle groups (six muscles) which are
denoted as being the dominant surface muscles acting on the knee
joint were chosen in order to form the presented musculoskeletal
model. Fig. 1 illustrates the anatomy of the thigh muscles and the
placement of the electrodes. In particular, six electrodes (Bagnoli16, Delsys Inc.) were attached to the extensor [rectus femoris
(RF), vastus medialis (VM) and vastus lateralis (VL)] and flexor
[biceps femoris (BF), semimembranosus (SM) and semitendinosus
(ST)] muscles. Furthermore, for the reader’s convenience in Fig. 2
is depicted an overview of the adopted model structure which
consists of the muscle activation dynamics, muscle contraction
dynamics and musculoskeletal geometry sections. As shown, from
the processed electromyography of each muscle ui are derived the
muscle activations ai and then the muscle–tendon forces Fimt which
result in the net torque τnet and the knee joint stiffness trend STI.
2.1. Activation dynamics
Electromyography (EMG) signals inherit patterns of activations
of involved muscles. In order to extract muscular activations, the
raw EMG signals must be processed. First, these signals are highpass filtered to remove offsets and movement artifacts. This stage
is followed by full rectification techniques [28]. Consequently, the
resulting signals are low-pass filtered and normalized in order
to provide traces of the neural activation of the muscles. In

80

N. Karavas et al. / Robotics and Autonomous Systems 73 (2015) 78–90

Fig. 1. Front and rear view of the human thigh illustrating the selected six muscles (three antagonistic groups) whose electromyography was used for the musculoskeletal
modeling.

Fig. 2. Block diagram of the information flow within the musculoskeletal model for deriving the net torque and the stiffness trend index.

this manuscript, the processed electromyographic signal of each
muscle is denoted as ui (t ).
Concerning the motor unit level, it has been observed that muscle force variations with respect to neural commands demonstrate
an exponential trend [29]. As a result, activation of the muscles ai
is defined by:
ai (t ) =

eAui (t ) − 1

(1)

eA − 1

where −3 < A < 0 is a nonlinear shape factor.
2.2. Contraction dynamics
Large scale modeling of the muscular force arising from activation dynamics is widely performed based on Hill’s muscle
model [30] and its extension proposed by Zajac [27]. These models are well-established in the biomechanics literature [29], and
have been extensively exploited in assistive technologies where
there exists human–robot interaction [12,31,32]. In such cases, the
muscle–tendon unit is modeled as a muscle fiber in series with a
viscoelastic tendon (see Fig. 3). Muscle fiber itself is modeled by
a contractile element in parallel with an elastic component. The
general equation associating the force generated by the contractile
element with the muscle–tendon force Fimt (t ) reads as follows:
Fimt (t ) = Fimax [fi (l)fi (v)ai (t ) + fpi (l)] cos(ψi (t ))

(2)

where
(t ) = (t ), with
(l), fi (v) corresponding to the tendon force, normalized force-length and normalized force–velocity
curves of the contractile element of muscle number i, and fpi refers
to the passive elastic normalized force-length relation (see details
in [27] and [29]). The pennation angle, which is defined as the angle between the tendon and the muscle fibers, is denoted by ψi (t )
and can be given by the following equation:
Fimt

ψi (t ) = sin−1

Fit



Fit , fi

lm
oi sin(ψoi )
lm
i

(t )


(3)

where (t ) is the muscle fiber length and ψoi the pennation angle
at the optimal muscle fiber length lm
oi .
lm
i

Fig. 3. Representation of the muscle–tendon unit based on Hill’s model.

Huijing in [33] has observed that the optimal muscle fiber
length increases as the muscle activation decreases. To take into
account this dependency of optimal muscle fiber length on activation fluctuations we adopt the relationship introduced in [29]:
′m
lm
oi (t ) = loi (γ (1 − ai (t )) + 1)

(4)

where l′omi represents the optimal fiber length at maximum activation and γ is the percentage change in optimal fiber length, chosen
to be 15% [29].
A dense body of literature reports on the linear relationship
between the tendon slack length lts , tendon force and the tendon
length lt . Such mapping is shown to be valid for lt > lts [25,29].
Here, similar assumptions have been made in modeling the tendon
length. In addition, we can write:
m
lti (t ) = lmt
i (t ) − li (t ) cos(ψi (t ))
mt

with l

(5)

denoting the muscle–tendon length.

2.3. Musculoskeletal geometry
The lengths of the muscle–tendon complexes acting on the knee
joint are shown to be functions of the knee joint angle [34]. In
these works, the muscle length values were fitted to a second order

N. Karavas et al. / Robotics and Autonomous Systems 73 (2015) 78–90

polynomial by means of least squares optimization technique.
Consequently, ¯lmt
i (t ) which accounts for the percentage of segment
length (the origin-to-insertion length relative to its length in full
extension of the knee) is defined and identified as follows:
2
¯lmt
i (t ) = C0i + C1i θknee (t ) + C2i θknee (t )

(6)

where θknee represents the knee joint angle in degrees and C0i ,
C1i and C2i are constants (see [34] for details). By adopting (4),
(5) and (6) the muscle fiber length can be identified and used
for the estimation of the contraction dynamics. Note that, as far
as concerns the accuracy of the model parameters of the muscle
fiber of each muscle we rely on the previous biomechanics studies
[25,29,34] and the re-identification experiment that is described in
Section 3.
The muscle moment arms ri (t ) of the muscle–tendon unit can
be described based on the displacements method proposed in [35]
which is defined by:
ri (t ) =

∂ lmt
i (t )
.
∂θknee

(7)

Consequently, the moment arms are determined as follows:
r¯i (t ) = [C1i + 2C2i θknee (t )]

180

(8)

π
where moment arms r¯i (t ) are expressed as a percentage of

segment length.
Once we have estimated the forces (2) and the moment arms
(8) of all chosen muscles acting on the joint, we are able to convert
the muscle forces to joint torques τ by means of the following
equation:



n




τi (t )
τ (t ) = 

 i =1

agonist



k




τj (t )
−

 j =1

(9)

antagonist

where τi (t ) = Fi (t )ri (t ), τj (t ) = Fj (t )rj (t ) with n and k being
the number of agonist and antagonist muscles acting on the joint,
respectively.
It has been shown that a simultaneous increase in antagonistic
muscle torques acting on the joint, does not affect the joint torque
(as seen in (9)) although it does increase joint stiffness [36].
Therefore, we can define the stiffness trend index (STI) as:


 



  

 

τj (t )
STI (t ) = 
τi (t ) + 

 antagonist
agonist

(10)

and the stiffness of the knee joint as:
K (t ) = α × STI (t ) + β
where α (rad

−1

(11)

) and β (Nm/rad) are to be identified constants.

3. Model identification–calibration
Several caveats apply to the forward dynamic methods,
described in Section 2. To begin with, concerning the EMG signals,
one must take into account reliable post-processing techniques
in order to maximize robustness of the estimation of muscular
activations. For instance, day-to-day and subject to subject
variations, temperature and humidity fluctuations, electrode
misplacement, crosstalk between signals and movement artifacts
will give rise to inaccuracy and drift of the estimated signals.
Furthermore, the model parameters ((2)–(6)) vary among subjects.
To minimize the modeling uncertainty, the parameters of the
model must be re-identified based on each user’s experimental
data. For this reason, we have set up identification–calibration
experiments to re-identify the parameters as described below.

81

3.1. Calibration experiments
One healthy subject (male, 27 years old) participated in identification–calibration experiments. The raw EMG signals were processed (at 1 kHz) and the muscular activities were estimated
during the identification experiments as well as during the teleimpedance control experiments that are to be described in Section 7.
The initial values of the model parameters as presented in Section 2 were extracted from the literature [25,26,30–35]. In order
to choose the number of parameters to be re-identified, one must
consider the reasonable tradeoff between modeling uncertainty
and identification complexity. Hence, seven constant parameters
of each muscle referring to the activation and contraction dynamics and muscle–tendon geometry were chosen to be adjusted relying on identification experiments. The chosen parameters were:
the maximum isometric muscle fiber force F max , the pennation angle at optimal fiber length ψo , the optimal fiber length lm
o , the nonlinear shape factor A, and the constants C0 , C1 and C2 .
For the identification experiments the subject was wearing the
knee exoskeleton while having the EMG electrodes attached as it
was described in Section 2 and illustrated in Fig. 1. In order to
take into account the muscle activation of both the knee flexor
and the extensor in the model identification, we performed two
tasks that involved each of the antagonistic group of muscles
separately. The exoskeleton was commanded to provide torques
that were proportional to the angular displacement from the
equilibrium position (active stiffness control). During the first task
the subject assumed a stand posture while the equilibrium position
of the exoskeleton was set to 0◦ . The subject was instructed
to flex his right knee at a certain angle with the minimum
possible contraction (flexor contribution). For every two trials the
exoskeleton stiffness was varying with a varied step as shown in
Table 1 resulting in 20 trials. During the second task the subject
was seated and the equilibrium position of the exoskeleton was
set to 90◦ , while he was asked to repeatedly extend his knee with
minimum contraction as well (extensor contribution). For each
two trials the exoskeleton stiffness was increased from 0 to 200
Nm/rad with a varied step similarly with the first task, see Table 1.
Thus, this task resulted in additional 20 trials.
During this experiment the torque applied by the human τˆh can
be estimated by the following equation:

τˆh = J θ¨knee + Dθ˙knee + τg + τe

(12)

where J represents the total inertia of the shank and the exoskeleton’s lower segment, D denotes the damping of the human knee
and the exoskeleton joint, while τg is the gravitational torque applied on the coupled system. In addition, τe is the torque applied by
the exoskeleton and equals to the measured elastic torque τs . Note
that movements were carried out at very low knee angular velocity and acceleration (quasi static). For this reason, the inertial and
damping moment effects were negligible in our setup and were not
taken into consideration. Thus, (12) can be simplified as:

τˆh = τe + τg = τs + (msh + mlseg )glCoM sin(θknee )

(13)

where msh denotes the mass of shank, mlseg is the mass of the lower
segment of the exoskeleton and lCoM refers to the center of mass of
the combined lower link and shank.
Even trials were chosen for the identification while the odd ones
were kept for evaluative analysis of the identification procedure.
The six-channel processed EMGs data together with the torques
τˆh and τe were used to identify the musculoskeletal model
parameters, described in 2. Due to the nonlinear dependency
between the knee joint torque and the corresponding muscular
activities, a nonlinear least square algorithm is utilized for the
identification of the model parameters while being constrained to
±10% above/below of their nominal values.

82

N. Karavas et al. / Robotics and Autonomous Systems 73 (2015) 78–90

a

b

40

100

20

80

0

60

25

55
40

15

20

5

0

35

BF
ST
SM

VL
VM
RF
0

1

2

3

4

5

6

7

0

1

2

3

4

Fig. 4. Comparison of the estimated torque of the knee joint and the one derived from the musculoskeletal model in extension (a) and flexion (b) identification trials. Knee
angular positions are also given, while in the lower plots are depicted the full rectified EMGs of the contributing muscles.
Table 1
Experimental Protocol used for the Model Calibration.
Number of trial

Exoskeleton
EQ. (deg)

Exoskeleton stiffness
(Nm/rad)

Number of trial

Exoskeleton
EQ.(deg)

Exoskeleton stiffness
(Nm/rad)

1&2 (flexion)
3&4 (flexion)
5&6 (flexion)
7&8 (flexion)
9&10 (flexion)
11&12 (flexion)
13&14 (flexion)
15&16 (flexion)
17&18 (flexion)
19&20 (flexion)

0◦
0◦
0◦
0◦
0◦
0◦
0◦
0◦
0◦
0◦

0
10
20
30
40
50
60
100
150
200

21&22 (extension)
23&24 (extension)
25&26 (extension)
27&28 (extension)
29&30 (extension)
31&32 (extension)
33&34 (extension)
35&36 (extension)
37&38 (extension)
39&40 (extension)

90◦
90◦
90◦
90◦
90◦
90◦
90◦
90◦
90◦
90◦

0
10
20
30
40
50
60
100
150
200

Table 2
Specifications of CompAct-RS.

3.2. Model validation
Typical results of the validation of the identified model using
extension and flexion test trials are demonstrated in Figs. 4(a) and
4(b), respectively. These experiments were performed with the
exoskeleton stiffness being set at 30 Nm/rad. The upper plots show
the model net torque τmodel and the measured toque τe , including
the gravitational part τg . The position of the knee joint θknee as it
was measured by the exoskeleton is also depicted in the upper
plots. Lower plots of the figures demonstrate the corresponding
full rectified EMG signals of the dominant muscles. To evaluate
the accuracy of the model, the normalized root mean square error
(NRMSE) was calculated for each test trial as follows:



n


(τmodel (i)−τmeasured (i))2

i=1

NRMSE =

n

τmeasuredmax − τmeasuredmin

(14)

with n denoting the number of points in each trial, and τmeasured =
τg + τe . The resulting values then were averaged for all the test
trials (extension and flexion) resulting in an average value of
12.4%. This error, even acceptable, comes partly from the modeling
uncertainty in our musculoskeletal model and partly from the
neglected effects of inertia and damping in τmeasured . Future work
will investigate model identification methods that will include also
dynamic movements.
4. Knee exoskeleton description
Physical human–robot interaction requires devices that present
fast adaptation to human volitional actions and safe behavior
during unexpected impacts [37]. To achieve these, it is essential
that the exoskeleton actuation system demonstrates low output
mechanical impedance and high force fidelity. In this context,
series elastic actuators (SEA) have been introduced to drive robots
and subsequently implemented into exoskeletons [2,8]. In these
actuation systems, an elastic element is placed between the motor
and the load and acts as an energy buffer. This lowers the loop

Description

Symbol

Value

Unit

Max Cont. Output Power
Elastic Torque (Max)
Motor Torque (Max)
Elastic deflection (Max)
Elastic energy (Max)
Allowable stiffness range

PRated

209
80
1.53
11
5.5
200 ∼ 800

Watts
Nm
Nm
deg
J
Nm/rad

τs
τM
θs
Us
KS

gain of the closed-loop system allowing for increased control
gains while still remaining within the stability margins [38]. High
control gains improve significantly robustness to changing loads
and tolerance to impacts, while lower the output impedance.
Therefore, SEA allow for precise and robust force control which
plays a key role to impedance-controlled systems.
The assistive device that was used for this pilot study is a
lightweight knee exoskeleton that is powered by CompAct-RS [39,
40]. CompAct-RS is a rotational series elastic actuator which is
able to reconfigure offline its apparent stiffness KS to achieve
subject-specific and task-specific compliance levels. Table 2 shows
the specifications of CompAct-RS. For this work, this was set to
KS = 200 Nm/rad, that was suitable for the execution of the
experiments which are described in Sections 3 and 7. As mentioned
above, a significant benefit of the inserted elasticity is that it
can be used for robust torque sensing by measuring the springs
deflection with a high resolution optical encoder (AEDA 3300,
Avago Technologies). This allows to achieve precise torque control
and avoid the addition of a conventional load sell that is expensive
and delicate. Nevertheless, the series elastic element affects the
dynamics of the overall system and, as it will be described in
Section 6, it needs to be included in the pertinent analysis.
Fig. 5 shows a subject wearing the exoskeleton on his right leg
with the axis of rotation of the exoskeleton joint aligned with the
axis of the user’s knee joint. The exoskeleton interfaces with the
wearer by means of four rigid braces and is fastened with four
Velcro straps at thigh and shank. The location of the bracing points
can be adjusted along the structure to accommodate different leg
sizes. Particular attention was paid to fast and easy donning and

N. Karavas et al. / Robotics and Autonomous Systems 73 (2015) 78–90

83

Fig. 6. Diagram that illustrates the derivation of the reference signals of the
impedance controller from the musculoskeletal model.

by the following equation:

τref = Kc (θref − θe ) + Bc (θ˙ref − θ˙e )

Fig. 5. The inherently compliant knee exoskeleton actuated by the series elastic
actuator CompAct-RS.

doffing (estimated less than one minute). Moreover, the range of
motion of the knee exoskeleton in the sagittal plane is between
0◦ and 120◦ where 0◦ corresponds to full extension of the knee.
Mechanical limits ensure that the actuator operates within this
motion range and ensures the exoskeleton safe to use.
5. Tele-impedance based assistive control
An ideal assistive device should generate supporting forces
upon the user’s request and simultaneously present high levels of
transparency during no assistance condition [8]. This implies that
it should match the performance of humans in terms of displacement and impedance regulation over a wide range of loads and
motions [41,42]. In some extent we address this challenge by exploiting tele-impedance, an approach that aims at replicating stiffness regulation skills of humans to robots [43]. In particular, the
exoskeleton is able to provide stiffness augmentation to the user
on the basis of his/her stiffness trace with the purpose of achieving effective assistance when is needed and to present high levels
of compliance when the muscle activation of the user is low. Regarding tele-impedance, it was previously proposed during teleoperated tasks which require significant dynamics variation as an
alternative method to unilateral position based control or bilateral force reflecting control. The algorithm provides the robot with
task-related stiffness profile in addition to position–orientation
trajectories [44].
The tele-impedance based proposed method utilizes electromyography as the primary basis. In contrast with other proposed EMG-based techniques implemented in exoskeletons [6,32],
that perform proportional torque control using the estimated
user’s torque, here we select to control in real-time the active
impedance of the exoskeleton according to stiffness estimates of
the user’s joint. Hence, we exploit the improved robustness of the
impedance control over the pure torque control due to its ability
to keep the desired joint configuration, even if the torque sensing/control is imperfect [45]. Moreover, we avoid other limitations
reported in studies with torque amplification-based exoskeletons,
where small variations in the estimated user’s torque cause undesirable high accelerations during high amplification ratios [32].
To produce tele-impedance control we utilize the EMG-driven
biomechanical model that was described in Section 2 and a
common impedance controller implemented in the exoskeleton’s
actuator unit. Hence, the exoskeleton tracks a torque reference
signal τref that is governed by the virtual impedance Gc and is given

(15)

where Kc , Bc represent the stiffness and the damping parameters
of the virtual impedance of reference, respectively. In addition
θe and θref denote the exoskeleton’s motor position and its
reference position, respectively. Fig. 6 depicts the derivation of
the references signals of the impedance controller (i.e. Kref , θref )
from the musculoskeletal model. In particular, the model uses as
inputs the processed EMGs and the knee angle q and outputs the
estimated user torque τˆh and the stiffness trend index STI.
Stiffness mapping
The stiffness reference input for the knee exoskeleton is
obtained from (11). The stiffness trend index (STI) is mapped to
a desired stiffness range that is defined according to the task and
subject requirements. For instance, when the subject is during high
load condition the exoskeleton provides motion assistance, while
when he/she acts during low load condition (i.e. no assistance
is required) the exoskeleton is transparent and does not impede
the user’s motion. In this manner, the exoskeleton can mimic the
biological stiffness function and respond to the user’s voluntary
motions. Furthermore, in case of disabled individuals different
levels of stiffness augmentation can be applied depending on the
particular motion task and subject. Thus, the identification of α and
β in Eq. (11) is task-related and subject-specific. In this manuscript,
the desired stiffness range is determined experimentally based on
a desired assistance performance (see Section 7).
A critical aspect when designing assistive control strategies is
also the detection of the user’s intended motion. In this work, we
infer about the user’s movement using the estimated user torque
τˆh . In particular, to generate assistive torques in the direction of
motion we select to update the equilibrium position of the knee
exoskeleton joint in accordance with the user’s intended motion,
the equilibrium of which is obtained from the estimated user
torque τˆh using the following formula:

θref =

 


k
(τˆh − a) dt

 f
0 



kf (τˆh + a) dt

τˆh > a
−a < τˆh < a

(16)

τˆh < −a

where kf and a are the sensitivity constant and the noise dead band
constant, respectively.
As is illustrated in Fig. 7, the controller is composed of an
inner torque loop and an outermost position loop. The position
and stiffness references described above feed the equilibrium
position and the active stiffness of the tele-impedance controller,
respectively. The active damping is set to vary proportionally to the
active stiffness as Bc = bKc = 0.01Kc . By deriving the equilibrium
position of the controller from (16), assistive forces augment the
user’s desired actions/motions via the virtual impedance Gc . Note
that, the controller operates at 1 kHz which is also the sampling
frequency of the EMGs.

84

N. Karavas et al. / Robotics and Autonomous Systems 73 (2015) 78–90

Fig. 7. The implemented tele-impedance controller that utilizes the EMG-driven musculoskeletal model.

6. The human–exoskeleton system dynamics for the standingup motion
To evaluate the effectiveness of the assistance provided to the
subject and the operation of the proposed control technique, we
select to study the standing up motion, which is one of the most
demanding task in terms of torque and power for the knee joint.
Hence, the model of the closed-loop human–exoskeleton system
during standing-up is presented below. The system’s response in
the time and frequency domain are investigated, while its stability
is analyzed within the usable range of the active stiffness Kc .
As the active stiffness varies in real-time the stability should be
investigated also under this dynamic condition and the allowable
maximum rate of the impedance regulation that ensures stability
has to be identified. To authors knowledge there is no such a study
to address this matter (i.e. stability of active impedance control
systems) mainly due to the high complexity of the pertinent
systems.
Fig. 8. Representation of the simplified physical system of the human-kneeexoskeleton and the concept of the tele-impedance control.

6.1. System modeling
A simplified human body model with 1-DOF in the sagittal plane
coupled with the knee exoskeleton is considered. In Fig. 8 is illustrated the human body model and the signals flow of the teleimpedance controller. As shown, for the sake of simplicity the
masses of the thigh, pelvis and torso have been combined into a
single body of mass mh . This obviously affects the estimation of the
gravitational loads during motion. However, assuming a concentrated inertia (i.e. no torso motion) can be deemed as a worst-case
scenario in terms of knee torque, since it has been observed that
humans incline forward their trunks during standing-up in order
to decrease the gravitational load and hence, facilitate the task [6].
Moreover, the ankle and foot dynamics have been neglected (i.e
shank is considered to be fixed to the ground) as during standingup slight ankle motion has been reported [46]. The external torques
acting on the system are the exoskeleton’s actuator torque τe , the
human net torque τh and the gravitational torque τg . During the
sitting to standing transition the system motion can be described
by the following equation:
Mx¨ + Bx˙ + Kx + G = τ

(17)

where M = diag (Ih , Ie ) ∈ R
with Ie being the reflected motor
inertia after the reduction drive. Moreover, B ∈ R2×2 is the damping matrix, K ∈ R2×2 is a symmetric stiffness matrix, and G ∈ R2×1
is the gravity vector. x ∈ R2×1 and τ ∈ R2×1 refer to the position
2×2

and torque vector, respectively. Eq. (17) can be rewritten in matrix
form as follow:



  
 
q¨
q˙
Bh 0
+
0 Be
θ¨e
θ˙e

  

KS
−K S
q
τh − mh gl sin q
+
=
−K S
KS
θe
τe

Ih
0

0
Ie

(18)

where θe = θNm , θ˙e = θNm are the position and velocity of the
exoskeleton motor, respectively reflected at the link side after the
gear reduction (N = 100: 1). As already mentioned, KS denotes
the series elasticity of the actuator. The inertia of the human body
is calculated as Ih = mh l2 , where l refers to the distance from
the knee joint center to the center of the combined human body
mass. In addition, Ie = N 2 Jm denotes the reflected motor inertia
after the reduction drive, while Be = N 2 Bm is the damping of the
exoskeleton motor reflected also after the reduction drive. q and q˙
refer to the position and velocity of the knee joint. Fig. 9 depicts a
schematic representation of (18) for the convenience of the reader.
˙

6.2. System response analysis
To study the operational concept of the tele-impedance based
assistive control and the system’s response both in time and

N. Karavas et al. / Robotics and Autonomous Systems 73 (2015) 78–90

Fig. 9. Conceptual schematic that illustrates the interaction mechanics between
exoskeleton and human including the tele-impedance controller.

a

b

85

X

Fig. 11. Zoomed Bode plots of the transfer function Xh for different values of the
e
active stiffness Kc (side colorbars depict values of Kc in Nm/rad).

where Gc = Kc + Bc s is the virtual impedance of the controller and
Xeq = L [θref (t )]. As mentioned in Section 5, the reference position
is derived from the estimated user torque as:
Xeq = Gf τh

(22)

where Gf = kf /s.
Inserting (22) into (21), substituting τm in (20) and then substituting τh in (19), while rearranging with respect to Xh gives:
Fig. 10. Simulation results corresponding to the standing-up motion.

Xh =
frequency domain, simulations were conducted on the 1-DOF
system that was modeled in Section 6.1.
As inputs of the model (Eq. (18)) were used the estimated torque
τˆh and the reference stiffness Kref , that were recorded during the
experiment described in Section 7, since they cannot be simulated.
Additionally, the combined mass of the human body was set as
Mh = 60 kg. The viscous damping of the knee joint varies significantly with muscle contraction and knee flexion angle and is
reported to be within the range 1–5 Nms/rad [47]. Based on these
findings the damping of the human knee joint was selected to be
in the middle of this range, thus Bh = 2.5 Nms/rad. The motor
inertia and damping both reflected after the reduction drive were
Ie = 0.36 kgm2 and Be = 0.607 Nms/rad, while the active damping was set to Bc = 0.01Kc . The sensitivity constant was selected at
kf = 0.034, a value that was tuned during the experimental trials
in Section 7.
Fig. 10(a) shows the motion of the knee q towards the reference
position θref and the deflection θs = θe − q of the elastic element
which allows the transmission of the assistive torque from the
actuator’s motor to the knee joint. The exoskeleton torque tracking
of τref is shown in Fig. 10(b).
The frequency response of the closed-loop system is also
discussed. The coupled pair (human leg + exoskeleton device)
described in Section 6.1 can be described in the frequency domain
by the following equations:

(Gh + Gs )Xh = τh + τg + Gs Xe

(19)

(Ge + Gs )Xe = N τm + Gs Xh

(20)

where Xh = L [q(t )] and Xe = L [θe (t )] with L symbolizing the
Laplace operator. The combined human body is modeled as a second order linear impedance: Gh = Ih s2 + Bh s. Additionally, Gs = KS
represents the series elasticity between the motor and the output
link and Ge = Ie s2 + Be s models the mass and damping properties
of the motor.
If we assume that the motor can track the reference torque
perfectly, it can be written:

τm = Gc (Xeq − Xe )

(21)

NGf Gc + NGc + Ges
Gf Ges Ghs + NGf Gc Ghs − Gf G2s

+

NGc + Ges
Ges Ghs + NGc Ghs − G2s

τg

Xe
(23)

where Ghs = Gh + Gs and Ges = Ge + Gs are used only for simplifying
the equation.
X
Having the transfer function Xh the frequency response of the
e
closed-loop system can be investigated. This is done within a range
of the active stiffness Kc close to the one which was applied during
the experiments described in Section 7. Fig. 11 demonstrates the
X
Bode plots of the Xh dynamics for different values of Kc . For demone
stration purposes the magnitude and phase plots are shown only
for the frequency range in which sort of variation is present. The
inherent elasticity was set at KS = 200 Nm/rad. As shown, considerable changes of the resonant peak occur within the small range
of 0 < Kc < 30 Nm/rad. Moreover, the peak of the magnitude of
the transfer function varies from 10 to 20 dB for the entire range
of 1 < Kc < 200 Nm/rad, while for Kc > 35 Nm/rad it does not
demonstrate any significant variation being close to 20 dB.
By neglecting the furthest away pole pair with respect to the
imaginary axis, we can approximate the system using a secondorder equation. Omitting the nonlinear effect of the gravity is safe
though, as this analysis is focused on the performance evaluation
of the tele-impedance controller in terms of system response while
the active stiffness Kc and series elasticity KS are varying. Thus,
the natural frequency ωn and the damping ratio ζ of the secondorder closed loop system were calculated for different values of the
active stiffness Kc and the series elasticity KS and are depicted in
Fig. 12. As shown, both the natural frequency ωn and the damping
ratio ζ do not vary significantly when the stiffness of the virtual
impedance, Kc is changing. This is due to the fact that the value of
the active stiffness Kc does not have much affect on the dominant
X
pole pair of the transfer function Xh . On the other hand, as expected
e
we can notice a significant change of the natural frequency ωn
and the damping ratio ζ as the stiffness of the series elasticity KS
decreases. Hence, it is evident that the dynamics of the system
are mainly affected by the series elasticity and not by the active
stiffness. This means that the system’s response depends on the
mechanical compliance of the exoskeleton’s actuator rather than
the regulation of the tele-impedance controller.

86

N. Karavas et al. / Robotics and Autonomous Systems 73 (2015) 78–90

into (17), that describes the physical system, and by considering
the approximation sin q ≈ q, it can be written:
Mx¨ + Bx˙ + Kx = Gx + Kc x + Bc x˙

(29)

where G is the linear gravity matrix:


G=
Fig. 12. Natural frequency (a) and damping ratio (b) for different values of Kc and
KS .

6.3. Stability analysis for time-variant virtual spring–damper

x˙ (t ) = (ξ1 A1 + ξ2 A2 + · · · + ξk Ak )x(t )
(24)

where x ∈ Rn is the state vector, Am ∈ Rnxn , m = 1, 2, . . . , k are
constant matrices and ξ = [ξ1 . . . ξk ] ∈ Rk is a vector of uncertain,
k
possibly time varying parameters with i=1 ξi = 1 and 0 ≤ ξi ≤ 1.
k is the number of the polytope vertices. The uncertain system (24) is
quadratically stable if and only if there exists a positive definite matrix
Pσ such as:
(25)

In our case the only time-varying variable of the system is Kc , as
the damping parameter is proportional to the stiffness Kc . Hence,
the vertices Aσ can be written as follows:



A1 = A0 + Avar [Kcmax ]
A2 = A0 + Avar [Kcmin ]

(26)

where A0 is a constant matrix and Avar (Kc ) is the time-varying matrix. Thus, according to the above theorem the system is quadratically stable if and only if there exists a positive definite P that
satisfies the following LMIs (Linear Matrix Inequality) condition:



AT1 P + A1 P < 0
AT2 P + A2 P < 0.

(27)

By calculating A1 and A2 the quadratic stability of the system (24)
can be investigated easily using the quadstab function of MATLAB,
which seeks a positive definite P that establishes quadratic stability. In addition, quadratic stability also allows infinitely fast rate of
change in the parameters because the solution P to the LMIs (27)
is a constant matrix [49].
For this study the equilibrium position is set to be zero,
therefore the control law is described as follow:

τe = −Kc θe − Bc θ˙e = −Kc θe − bKc θ˙e .

(28)

In addition, the human net torque is an external signal and does
not affect the stability analysis, thus τh = 0. By substituting (28)



0
0

(30)

while Kc and Bc refer to the active stiffness and damping matrices,
respectively and are given by the following equations:



Theorem 1. Consider the following linear continuous-time parameter-varying polytopic system:

Aσ Pσ + ATσ Pσ < 0.

0

Kc =

As the main feature of the proposed tele-impedance control
scheme is the real-time variation of the active impedance based
on the stiffness estimates of the user’s knee joint, the behavior
of the system in terms of stability has to be examined not only
in the steady state condition but also during the transient state.
Another important matter is the maximum allowable rate, with
which the active stiffness Kc can vary ensuring the stability of the
closed-loop system. In this subsection both of these concerns will
be investigated using the quadratic stability theory for continuoustime systems with polytopic uncertainties [48].

= Aσ (t ) x(t )

−mgl



0
0

0
,
−K c


Bc =

0
0



0
.
−bKc

(31)

Eq. (29) can be rewritten in the form:
x¨ = −M−1 Bx˙ − (M−1 K − M−1 G)x

+ M−1 Kc x + M−1 Bc x˙ .

(32)

By setting:

 
z =

x
x˙

(33)

(32) becomes as follow:
z˙ = A0 z + Avar z

(34)

where the constant matrix A0 and the variable-dependent matrix
Avar are given by:



O2×2
A0 =
−M−1 K + M−1 G


Avar =

O2×2
M−1 Kc

O2×2
−M − 1 B c



I2×2
−M − 1 B

(35)


(36)

with I and O being the unit and zero matrix, respectively. By using
(35) and (36) the vertices A1 and A2 described in (26) can be
calculated. The selected extreme values of the active stiffness were
Kcmin = 1 Nm/rad and Kcmax = 1000 Nm/rad. The resultant A1
and A2 are used as input to the quadstab MATLAB function ending
up in a positive definite P that satisfies (27). Therefore, the system
(24) is quadratically stable implying that theoretically the active
stiffness Kc can vary within the above range at an infinitely fast
rate of change.
7. Experimental results
To evaluate this case study experiments were conducted during
sit-to-stand and stand-to-sit movement with the same subject who
participated in the calibration procedure described in Section 3.
The subject was firstly instructed to stand up from a sitting
posture while wearing the exoskeleton on his right leg and having
attached the EMG electrodes to his thigh (see Fig. 13). The second
task involved sitting-down from a standing posture. During the
execution of the experiments the subject was asked to support
most of his body weight with the right leg and use his left leg
mostly for maintaining the body balancing if needed. In this
manner the task became more demanding but also its duration was
increased. Five trials were recorded with the exoskeleton being in
zero torque mode (i.e. no motion assistance) and ten trials for each
task were performed, while the exoskeleton was operating under
the proposed control scheme.
The minimum and maximum values of the STI were obtained
from the minimum and maximum co-contraction of the thigh
muscles of the subject before the experiment’s beginning. These
were then mapped to the desired stiffness range that was set from
0 to 200 Nm/rad. The suitability of this range was validated through

N. Karavas et al. / Robotics and Autonomous Systems 73 (2015) 78–90

stiffness of the impedance controller and the activation of each
muscle. In Fig. 15(b) the assistive torque applied by the exoskeleton and the estimated user’s torque together with the trend of the
knee angle q towards the equilibrium position θref are depicted. In
all figures the phase of the standing-up motion is marked with a
yellow background for convenience of the reader. As expected, the
user’s torque in Fig. 15 is smaller than the one in Fig. 14, fact that
highlights the received by the exoskeleton assistance. Similar reduction is observed also at the amplitude of the stiffness estimates.
Moreover, the user’s torque in Fig. 15(b) exhibits a lesser degree of
smoothness that justifies the human–exoskeleton interaction during the assistance. Similar findings have been reported also in [32].
In the lower plot in Fig. 15 the equilibrium position θref pulls via
the virtual impedance the knee angle q towards the final position
(standing). However, these quantities are not equal at the end
of the task. This is due to the imperfect tuning of the sensitivity
constant kf , which does not perfectly fit to the time execution of the
task. Future study will examine the effects of the constant kf to the
assistive functionality of the proposed system as well as possible
improved methods for its tuning.
Looking at Fig. 15(a), the variation of the active stiffness
follows the trace of the subject’s muscle stiffness. As expected,
at free seated posture the stiffness is approximately zero. As the
subject gets prepared to perform the motion his muscle activation
increases and therefore the stiffness increases as well even prior to
the initiation of standing (see time interval 1.2 s < t < 2.45 s). As
it can be seen the standing motion begins at a knee joint stiffness
of about 30 Nm/rad at t = 2.45 s. When the task initiates, the
reference stiffness keeps on increasing because the subject needs
to accelerate and compensate the gravitational torque. Hence, the
assistive torque provided by the exoskeleton can be naturally
increased. The peak of the reference stiffness occurs at t = 4.3 s
when the sum of all the antagonistic muscle torques is maximum
(see (10)), while the applied torque reaches its peak at t = 4.1 s
according to (15). In the final phase of the task (when the subject
is close to the standing posture) the muscle activation decreases
(gravitational load decreases) and consequently the reference
stiffness and the provided assistive torque reduce. At the standing
posture the stiffness presents a constant value due to the straight
knee singular position where the antagonistic muscle activation is
not zero. However, this can be observed also in the case of the user’s
torque indicating a limitation of the model’s prediction.
Similarly, one of the stand-to-sit trials with the exoskeleton
assistance is depicted in Fig. 16. The motion task lasts for t =
1.65 − 4.27 s and is marked with a yellow background. At the
standing posture the active stiffness has a low value due to the knee
singular position and starts increasing when the motion begins
at t = 1.65 s, see Fig. 16(a). Hence, it allows the exoskeleton to
provide an assistive torque with a peak of 25 Nm to the subject

Fig. 13. Snapshots from the standing-up motion trials for experimental evaluation.

200

100
80
60
40
20
0

150
100
50
0

Fig. 14. A sit-to-stand trial without provided assistance; top: the estimated user’s
torque, and the joint stiffness estimates. Bottom: the knee angle as recorded from
the device.

a sequence of sit-to-stand and stand-to-sit trials. For all the trials,
the noise dead band constant in (16) was set to a = 1 Nm, while the
torque integration constant kf was experimentally tuned ensuring
that the reference position update from (16) was sufficiently fast
for the task execution. In particular for the standing-up was set to
kf = 0.034, whereas for the sitting-down to kf = 0.045.
Results of one sit-to-stand trial with zero assistance are
depicted in Fig. 14. The estimated user’s torque and the joint
stiffness estimates, as derived from the musculoskeletal model, in
addition with the knee joint position are shown. The amplitude of
the user’s torque τh is around 80 Nm, a value that can be confirmed
also from biomechanics data in literature [46]. A quantitative
evaluation of the joint stiffness estimates though is meaningless,
as their values depend on the selected stiffness range.
Fig. 15 illustrates results obtained from one of the ‘‘with assistance’’ standing-up trials. In particular, Fig. 15(a) shows the active

a 100
80

87

b

60
40
20
0

Fig. 15. (a) Active stiffness of the tele-impedance controller during standing up based on the trace of the user’s joint stiffness and the muscle activations of the six muscles.
(b) Top: the applied torque by the exoskeleton and the estimated user’s torque. Bottom: the reference position (equilibrium) and the actual position of the knee exoskeleton
device.

88

N. Karavas et al. / Robotics and Autonomous Systems 73 (2015) 78–90

a 100
80
60
40
20
0

b

Fig. 16. (a) Active stiffness of the tele-impedance controller during stand-to-sit assistance and the muscle activations of the six muscles. (b) Top: the applied torque by the
exoskeleton and the estimated user’s torque. Bottom: the reference position (equilibrium) and the actual position of the knee exoskeleton device.

who is decelerating against gravity, see Fig. 16(b). At the end of the
motion (t = 4.27 s) the active stiffness is zero resulting in zero
assistance. In addition, as shown in Fig. 16(b)), the knee angle q
moves towards the equilibrium position θref and reaches a constant
value. Note that, the values of the active stiffness, estimated user’s
torque and applied torque are very comparable with the ones of
the trial of the standing-up assistance shown in Fig. 15. However,
as for the subject is difficult to obtain the exact sharing of weight
between his two legs during the stand-to-sit and sit-to-stand trials,
slight differences there can be noticed.
Furthermore, the results presented in Figs. 15 and 16 demonstrate also the advantage of the proposed control technique over
simple torque amplification methods, where the assistive torque
is proportional to the user’s estimated torque [6,32]. The applied torques by the exoskeleton are significantly smoother, which
means that the human–exoskeleton interaction and the comfort
have been substantially improved [32]. In addition, this technique
is more robust to unavoidable inaccuracies of the user’s torque,
and can provide low levels of support for small muscle activations
and higher assistance for greater forces from the user, instead of
performing this just proportionally with a constant ratio regardless the level of the muscle activation [32]. On the other hand, our
method requires that we provide with position trajectories.
8. Discussion
The main evident result of the experiments is that the exoskeleton combined with the proposed control scheme can provide a
large part of the required torque for standing-up. To our knowledge
there is no study with regard to classification of assistance levels
provided by an exoskeleton. Hence, we have assumed that the percentage of about 30% of the user’s torque (i.e. the applied assistive
torque in the presented experiment) is sufficient to justify the effectiveness of the exoskeleton assistance. If this is required though,
the exoskeleton is able to apply greater levels of assistance by increasing the desired stiffness range (to which the stiffness trend index (STI) is mapped) and/or by adjusting the sensitivity constant kf .
However, a matter that cannot be illustrated in figures is
related to the wearer’s degree of comfort, and the sense of his
controllability over the device. In particular, the subject reported a
seamless integration between the user intent and the operation of
the exoskeleton, in addition to the experiencing of an exceedingly
high degree of comfort and agility during motion. The user could
receive flexible support by the exoskeleton, which he was able to
regulate according to his muscle activations.
Another important issue that needs discussion regards the
adopted stiffness estimation approach. As it is described in
Section 5, we select to linearly map the stiffness trend index to a
desired task-related and subject-specific stiffness range (see (10)
and (11)). This assumption was sufficient in our setup, as the goal
in this work is to replicate the stiffness trends of the human to the
exoskeleton, rather than quantify joint stiffness.

Regarding defects of the proposed control technique that
require improvement, the adjustment of the sensitivity constant kf
needs enhancement as it has to be carefully tuned according to the
time execution of the task. Future work will examine automated
methods to facilitate the derivation of the equilibrium position.
The complexity of the musculoskeletal model imposes the need
for the calibration of 7 × n parameters, with n being the number
of muscles. This renders the use of the device time consuming
and inconvenient. A potential improvement can be accommodated
through introduction of the muscle synergies [50], which gives evidence to the fact that specific motor patterns can be extracted
from dominant muscles involved in the task. This requires further investigation on the contribution of the coordinated muscular activations to the task values. Moreover, the model has been
calibrated in quasi-static movements where the inertia moments
effect has been neglected. Future work will focus on model identification methods that will take into account inertia loads during
dynamic conditions.
Furthermore, it is worth to mention that the quadratic stability
of the proposed control technique has been investigated and
proved that theoretically the active stiffness Kc , that is derived
directly from the muscle activity of the operator, can vary at an
infinitely fast rate of change.
9. Conclusion
This work discussed a tele-impedance based assistive control
strategy for a compliant knee exoskeleton to achieve volitional
stiffness augmentation and effective motion assistance, that are
based on the flexibility of the user’s joint. An EMG-driven musculoskeletal model, that combines results of other biomechanical
works, was developed to determine the user’s intended motion
and the joint stiffness estimates. This model provides the reference signals to the proposed controller that allows the exoskeleton to generate assistive torques under the user’s command and
simultaneously exhibit high levels of transparency when no assistance is required. In addition, simulation studies of the closed-loop
human–exoskeleton system were conducted and its stability was
proved in both steady state and transient condition. Experimental
evaluation of the proposed control strategy was carried out during the standing-up and sitting-down demonstrating that the user
was able to volitionally and intuitively control the knee exoskeleton while receiving an effective motion assistance.
Future work will seek to enhance the model and its calibration
method to achieve faster, more convenient use with the exoskeleton. In addition, experimentation will be extended with disabled
individuals with limited leg torques in order to verify the suitability of this control method in such conditions.
Appendix A. Supplementary data
Supplementary material related to this article can be found
online at http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.robot.2014.09.027.

N. Karavas et al. / Robotics and Autonomous Systems 73 (2015) 78–90

References
[1] H. Kazerooni, A. Chu, R. Steger, That which does not stabilize, will only make
US stronger, Int. J. Robot. Res. 26 (1) (2007) 75–89.
[2] J.F. Veneman, R. Kruidhof, E.E.G. Hekman, R. Ekkelenkamp, E.H.F. Van
Asseldonk, H. van der Kooij, Design and evaluation of the LOPES exoskeleton
robot for interactive gait rehabilitation, IEEE Trans. Neural Syst. Rehabil. 15 (3)
(2007) 379–386.
[3] N. Vitiello, T. Lenzi, S. Roccella, S.M.M. De Rossi, E. Cattin, F. Giovacchini, F.
Vecchi, M.C. Carrozza, NEUROExos: A powered elbow exoskeleton for physical
rehabilitation, IEEE Trans. Robot. 29 (1) (2013) 220–235.
[4] P. Beyl, M. Van Damme, R. Van Ham, R. Versluys, B. Vanderborght, D. Lefeber,
An exoskeleton for gait rehabilitation: prototype design and control principle,
in: Robotics and Automation, 2008. ICRA 2008. IEEE International Conference
on, IEEE, 2008, pp. 2037–2042.
[5] K. Kong, D. Jeon, Design and control of an exoskeleton for the elderly and
patients, IEEE/ASME Trans. Mechatronics 11 (4) (2006) 428–432.
[6] A. Tsukahara, R. Kawanishi, Y. Hasegawa, Y. Sankai, Sit-to-stand and stand-tosit transfer support for complete paraplegic patients with robot suit HAL, Adv.
Robot. 24 (11) (2010) 1615–1638.
[7] REX Bionics. www.rexbionics.com.
[8] J.E. Pratt, B.T. Krupp, C.J. Morse, S.H. Collins, The RoboKnee: an exoskeleton
for enhancing strength and endurance during walking, in: Robotics and
Automation, 2004. Proceedings. ICRA ’04. 2004 IEEE International Conference
on, vol. 3, 2004, pp. 2430–2435.
[9] R.J. Farris, H.A. Quintero, M. Goldfarb, Preliminary evaluation of a powered
lower limb orthosis to aid walking in paraplegic individuals, IEEE Trans. Neural
Syst. Rehabil. Eng. 19 (6) (2011) 652–659.
[10] M. Grün, U. Konigorski, Observer based method for joint torque estimation in
active orthoses, in: Mathematical Modelling, vol. 7, 2012, pp. 199–204.
[11] T. Lenzi, S.M.M. De Rossi, N. Vitiello, M.C. Carrozza, Intention-based EMG
control for powered exoskeletons, IEEE Trans. Biomed. Engrg. 59 (8) (2012)
2180–2190.
[12] W. Hassani, S. Mohammed, H. Rifa, EMG based approach for wearer-centered
control of a knee joint actuated orthosis, in: Intelligent Robots and Systems
(IROS), 2013 IEEE/RSJ International Conference on, 2013, pp. 990–995.
[13] E. Guizzo, H. Goldstein, The rise of the body bots, Spectrum, IEEE 42 (10) (2005)
50–56.
[14] H. Lee, N. Hogan, Investigation of human ankle mechanical impedance
during locomotion using a wearable ankle robot, in: 2013 IEEE International
Conference on Robotics and Automation, IEEE, 2013, pp. 2651–2656.
[15] P.H. Chang, S.H. Kang, Stochastic estimation of human arm impedance under
nonlinear friction in robot joints: a model study, J. Neurosci. Methods 189
(2010) 97–112.
[16] N.L. Tagliamonte, F. Sergi, G. Carpino, D. Accoto, E. Guglielmelli, Design of a
variable impedance differential actuator for wearable robotics applications,
in: 2010 IEEE/RSJ International Conference on Intelligent Robots and Systems,
2010, pp. 2639–2644.
[17] E.C. Martinez-Villalpando, H. Herr, Agonist-antagonist active knee prosthesis:
a preliminary study in level-ground walking, J. Rehabil. Res. Dev. 46 (3) (2009)
361–373.
[18] T.C. Bulea, R. Kobetic, C.S. To, M.L. Audu, J.R. Schnellenberger, R.J. Triolo, A
variable impedance knee mechanism for controlled stance flexion during
pathological gait, IEEE/ASME Trans. Mechatronics 17 (5) (2012) 822–832.
[19] J.A. Blaya, H. Herr, Adaptive control of a variable-impedance ankle-foot
orthosis to assist drop-foot gait, IEEE Trans. Neural Syst. Rehabil. 12 (1) (2004)
24–31.
[20] S. Lee, Y. Sankai, Power assist control for walking aid with HAL-3 based on
EMG and impedance adjustment around knee joint, in: Intelligent Robots
and Systems, 2002. IEEE/RSJ International Conference on, vol. 2, 2002, pp.
1499–1504.
[21] R. Riener, L. Lunenburger, S. Jezernik, M. Anderschitz, G. Colombo, V.
Dietz, Patient-cooperative strategies for robot-aided treadmill training: first
experimental results, IEEE Trans. Neural Syst. Rehabil. 13 (3) (2005) 380–394.
[22] S. Hussain, S.Q. Xie, P.K. Jamwal, Adaptive impedance control of a robotic
orthosis for gait rehabilitation, in: IEEE Transactions on Systems, Man, and
Cybernetics, Part B (Cybernetics), 2012, pp. 1–10.
[23] M. Garabini, A. Passaglia, F. Belo, P. Salaris, A. Bicchi, Optimality principles
in stiffness control: The VSA kick, in: 2012 IEEE International Conference on
Robotics and Automation, IEEE, 2012, pp. 3341–3346.
[24] N. Karavas, A. Ajoudani, S.J., N. Tsagarakis, A. Bicchi, C. D G, Tele-impedance
based stiffness and motion augmentation for a knee exoskeleton device, in:
Robotics and Automation, 2013. IEEE International Conference on, 2013.
[25] T.S. Buchanan, D.G. Lloyd, K. Manal, T.F. Besier, Neuromusculoskeletal
modeling: estimation of muscle forces and joint moments and movements
from measurements of neural command, J. Appl. Biomech. 20 (4) (2004) 367.
[26] T.S. Buchanan, D.A. Shreeve, An evaluation of optimization techniques for the
prediction of muscle activation patterns during isometric tasks, J. Biomech.
Eng. 118 (1996) 565.
[27] F.E. Zajac, Muscle and tendon: properties, models, scaling, and application to
biomechanics and motor control, Crit. Rev. Biomed. Eng. 17 (4) (1989) 359.
[28] C. De Luca, The use of surface electromyography in biomechanics, J. Appl.
Biomech. 13 (1997) 135–163.
[29] D.G. Lloyd, T.F. Besier, An EMG-driven musculoskeletal model to estimate
muscle forces and knee joint moments in vivo, J. Biomech. 36 (6) (2003)
765–776.

89

[30] A.V. Hill, The heat of shortening and the dynamic constants of muscle, Proc.
Roy. Soc. Lond. Ser. B, Biological Sciences 126 (843) (1938) 136–195.
[31] M. Sartori, M. Reggiani, E. Pagello, D.G. Lloyd, Modeling the human knee for
assistive technologies, 2012.
[32] C. Fleischer, G. Hommel, A Human–exoskeleton interface utilizing electromyography, IEEE Trans. Robot. 24 (4) (2008) 872–882.
[33] P.A. Huijing, Important experimental factors for skeletal muscle modelling:
non-linear changes of muscle length force characteristics as a function of
degree of activity, Eur. J. Morphol. 34 (1) (1996) 47–54.
[34] J.J. Visser, J.E. Hoogkamer, M.F. Bobbert, P.A. Huijing, Length and moment arm
of human leg muscles as a function of knee and hip-joint angles, Eur. J. Appl.
Physiol. 61 (5) (1990) 453–460.
[35] K.N. An, K. Takahashi, T.P. Harrigan, E.Y. Chao, Determination of muscle
orientations and moment arms, J. Biomech. Eng. 106 (1984) 280.
[36] R. Osu, D.W. Franklin, H. Kato, H. Gomi, K. Domen, T. Yoshioka, M. Kawato,
Short-and long-term changes in joint co-contraction associated with motor
learning as revealed from surface EMG, J. Neurophysiol. 88 (2) (2002)
991–1004.
[37] J.F. Veneman, R. Ekkelenkamp, R. Kruidhof, F.C.T. van der Helm, H. van der
Kooij, A series elastic- and bowden-cable-based actuation system for use as
torque actuator in exoskeleton-type robots, Int. J. Robot. Res. 25 (3) (2006)
261–281.
[38] G. Pratt, M. Williamson, Series elastic actuators, in: Proceedings 1995 IEEE/RSJ
International Conference on Intelligent Robots and Systems, in: Human Robot
Interaction and Cooperative Robots, vol. 1, IEEE Comput. Soc. Press, 1995,
pp. 399–406.
[39] N.C. Karavas, N.G. Tsagarakis, J. Saglia, D.G. Caldwell, A novel actuator
with reconfigurable stiffness for a knee exoskeleton: Design and modeling,
in: J.S. Dai, M. Zoppi, X. Kong (Eds.), Advances in Reconfigurable Mechanisms
and Robots I, Springer, London, 2012, pp. 411–421.
[40] N.C. Karavas, N.G. Tsagarakis, D.G. Caldwell, Design, modeling and control
of a series elastic actuator for an assistive knee exoskeleton, in: Biomedical
Robotics and Biomechatronics (BioRob), 2012 4th IEEE RAS EMBS International
Conference on, 2012, pp. 1813–1819.
[41] T. Lenzi, N. Vitiello, S.M.M. De Rossi, S. Roccella, F. Vecchi, M.C. Carrozza,
NEUROExos: A variable impedance powered elbow exoskeleton, in: 2011 IEEE
International Conference on Robotics and Automation, 2011, pp. 1419–1426.
[42] R. Schiavi, G. Grioli, S. Sen, A. Bicchi, VSA-II: a novel prototype of variable
stiffness actuator for safe and performing robots interacting with humans, in:
2008 IEEE International Conference on Robotics and Automation, 2008.
[43] A. Ajoudani, N. Tsagarakis, A. Bicchi, Tele-impedance: Teleoperation with
impedance regulation using a body-machine interface, Int. J. Robot. Res. 31
(13) (2012) 1642–1656.
[44] A. Ajoudani, N.G. Tsagarakis, A. Bicchi, Tele-impedance: Towards transferring
human impedance regulation skills to robots, in: International Conference of
Robotics and Automation - ICRA 2012, Saint Paul, MN, USA, 2012.
[45] N. Hogan, Impedance control: An approach to manipulation: Part IIIApplications, J. Dyn. Syst. Meas. Control 107 (1985) 17–24.
[46] A. Kralj, R.J. Jaeger, M. Munih, Analysis of standing up and sitting down in
humans: definitions and normative data presentation, J. Biomech. 23 (11)
(1990) 1123–1138.
[47] L.-Q. Zhang, G. Nuber, J. Butler, M. Bowen, W.Z. Rymer, In vivo human knee
joint dynamic properties as functions of muscle contraction and joint position,
J. Biomech. 31 (1) (1997) 71–76.
[48] L. Grman, D. Rosinova, A. Kozakova, V. Vesely, Robust stability conditions for
polytopic systems, Int. J. Syst. Sci. (2005) 1–20.
[49] A. Trofino, C.E.D. Souza, Biquadratic stability of uncertain linear systems, IEEE
Trans. Autom. Control 46 (8) (2001) 1303–1307.
[50] A. D’Avella, P. Saltiel, E. Bizzi, Combinations of muscle synergies in the
construction of a natural motor behavior, Nature Neurosci. 6 (3) (2003)
300–308.

Nikos Karavas received the Dipl.-Eng. degree in Electrical and Computer engineering from the University of Patras, 2009. In 2014 he obtained the Ph.D. degree in the
field of Human-centered mechatronics at the Advanced
Robotics Department of the Italian Institute of Technology.
Currently, he is a Postdoctoral Researcher at the Harvard
Biodesign Lab of the Harvard University. He received the
Best Student Paper award at ROBIO 2013. His research interests include among others: assistive wearable robotics,
variable impedance systems, biomechanics and control of
compliant robots.
Arash Ajoudani received Ph.D. degree from Centro ‘‘E Piaggio’’, University of Pisa, and Humanoids and Human Centred Mechatronics Lab, Advanced Robotics Department
(ADVR), Italian Institute of Technology (IIT), in 2014. He
is currently a postdoctoral researcher at the ADVR, IIT. He
was a winner of the best student paper award at ROBIO
2013, and a finalist for the Best Manipulation paper award
at ICRA 2012. He is currently serving as a Co-Chair for the
Student Activities Committee (SAC) of the IEEE Robotics
and Automation Society (RAS). His main research interests
are in physical human–robot interaction, impedance control, rehabilitation robotics, robust and adaptive control, and tele-robotics.

90

N. Karavas et al. / Robotics and Autonomous Systems 73 (2015) 78–90

Nikos Tsagarakis received the Dip.-Eng. degree in electrical and computer science engineering from the Aristotle University in Greece, in 1995, the M.Sc. degree in
control engineering in 1997, and the Ph.D. degree in
robotics from the University of Salford, Salford, UK, in
2000. Before becoming a Senior Researcher at Italian Institution of Technology, Genova, Italy, with over-all responsibility for Humanoid and Human Centred Mechatronics
Design, he was a Research Fellow and then a Senior Research Fellow in the Centre for Robotics and Automation
at the University of Salford, where he worked on haptic
systems, wearable exoskeletons, rehabilitation robots, and humanoids robots. He is
the author or coauthor of more than 140 papers in research journals.

Antonio Bicchi is Professor of Robotics at the University of
Pisa, and Senior Scientist at the Italian Institute of Technology in Genoa. He graduated from the University of Bologna
in 1988 and was a postdoc scholar at M.I.T. Artificial Intelligence lab in 1988–1990. His main research interests are
in Robotics, Haptics, and Control Systems in general. He
has published more than 300 papers on international journals, books, and refereed conferences. He currently serves
as the President of the Italian Association or Researchers in
Automatic Control. He has served as Editor in Chief of the
Conference Editorial Board for the IEEE Robotics and Automation Society (RAS), as Vice President and as Distinguished Lecturer of IEEE RAS.
He is Editor-in-Chief for the book series ‘‘Springer Briefs on Control, Automation and
Robotics’’, and is in the editorial board of several scientific journals, including the
top-ranked Int.l J. Robotics Research, the IEEE Trans. on Robotics and Automation,
IEEE Trans. Automation Science and Engineering, and IEEE RAS Magazine.

Jody Saglia received the B.Eng. degree in automation engineering and the M.Sc. degree in mechatronics engineering from the Polytechnic of Turin, Turin, Italy, in 2004 and
2007, respectively, and the Ph.D. degree from King’s College London, London, UK, in 2010. He was a researcher at
King’s College London in 2006. Since 2007, he has been
a Research Fellow at the Istituto Italiano di Tecnologia,
Genoa, Italy, where he is currently a Researcher at the Rehab Technologies Facility. His research interests include
mechanisms design, rehabilitation robotics, mechatronic
design, actuation systems, and human–robot interaction.
Dr. Saglia received the Professional Engineering Publishing Award from the Journal
of Systems and Control Engineering in 2009.

Darwin Caldwell received the B.S. and Ph.D. degrees in
robotics from the University of Hull, Hull, UK, in 1986
and 1990, respectively and the M.Sc. degree in management in 1996 from the University of Salford, Salford, UK.
He is currently the Director of Advanced Robotics at the
Italian Institute of Technology, Genova, Italy, and a Visiting/Honorary Professor at the Universities of Sheffield,
Manchester, Kings College, Bangor, and Tianjin (China). He
is the author or coauthor of more than 300 academic papers, and has 15 patents. His research interests include
innovative actuators, force augmentation exoskeletons,
dexterous manipulators, humanoid (iCub and COMAN) and quadrupled robots
(HyQ), and rehabilitation robotics.

