Image and Vision Computing 30 (2012) 463–464

Contents lists available at SciVerse ScienceDirect

Image and Vision Computing
journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/imavis

Can the World-Wide Web Bridge the Semantic Gap?
Thomas S. Huang
Beckman Institute University of Illinois Urbana Champaign

a r t i c l e

i n f o

Keywords:
Opinion paper
New frontiers in computer vision

a b s t r a c t
The World-Wide Web provides tremendous resources in Multimedia Data, Ubiquitous Interconnection, and
Storage/Computing Power. In this short note, we raise but not answer the question: Can the WWW help
bridge the Semantic Gap in Computer Vision? Even if the answer turns out to be NO, we hope that by exploring these resources, we may gain a deeper understanding of the Semantic Gap challenge.
© 2011 Elsevier B.V. Open access under CC BY-NC-ND license.

One of the most challenging problems in Computer Vision is: How to
bridge the Semantic Gap; i.e., how to map low-level relatively easily extractable visual features to high-level Semantic Concepts. The Computer
Vision community have been working on this problem for many years
and have made considerable progress, especially in recent several
years. However, it is still not clear what is the best we can do. A major
difﬁculty is that a given Semantic Concept can take on many different
visual appearances. The advent and evolution of the World-Wide Web
offers new hope for a deeper understanding of the Semantic Gap.
What we need is HUGE labeled image and video databases; and enough
computing power to try out various inference algorithms.
There are tremendous resources on the Web that we can exploit,
including:
1. Abundance of multimedia data, esp. images with tags and surrounding texts; and videos with tags, speech/audio sound tracks,
closed captions, and even transcripts,
2. Ubiquitous interconnection enabling “Social Computing”,
3. Emergence of Cloud Computing, making available massive storage
space and computing power.
To make it concrete, let us take the task of construction and utilization
of Web-Scale labeled image databases. For a particular domain (e.g.,
antural disasters), we crawl the Web (using keyword search) to gather
a huge amount of multimedia data (in this case, images with associated
texts). From the texts, using Natural Language Processing, we extract
key Semantic Concepts and ﬁnd Relationships between the Concepts.
Then images are attached to each Concept. This labeled image database
can be represented by a Relational Graph with two types of Nodes: Concept Nodes and Data (image) Nodes. The Links between the Concept
Nodes are Relations (forming an Ontology); the Links between the Data
Nodes could be some measure of Visual Similarity); the Links between a
Data Node and a Concept Node represent Attachment. This is merely a
simple example of a representation for the STRUCTURE of the multimedia
database. We call this kind of structure a Multimedia Information
E-mail address: huang@ifp.uiuc.edu.
0262-8856 © 2011 Elsevier B.V. Open access under CC BY-NC-ND license.
doi:10.1016/j.imavis.2011.10.001

Network (MINet). Other possible structures abound. But the important
point is we do need a STRUCTURED database; putting all the Concepts
at the same level is untenable, since even for simple domains, the number
of Concepts could be in the thousands if not millions, making inference
very difﬁcult if not impossible. We believe imposing an Ontology on the
Concepts should help. But the challenge is to ﬁnd novel paradigms to do
inference in the context of an Ontology.
Another challenge of this approach is this: Because the construction
of the structured multimedia database is automatic (or semiautomatic), the resulting database will contain errors and uncertainties.
(a) How do we measure the Quality of the Information (QOI) contained in the database?
(b) How do we reduce the errors and uncertainties? Perhaps by
using "Social Computing" (e.g., Amazon's Mechanical Turk)?
(c) Find Robust inference methods which will give adequate performance even in the presence of errors and uncertainties.
(d) Storage and computing requirements. Here perhaps Cloud
Computing could help. However, current Cloud Computing
systems are mainly for document processing, not suitable for
working with high-dimensional scientiﬁc data. We need new
paradigms of Cloud Computing for what we do.
In the above I have outlined some of our very preliminary thoughts.
My students (Guojun Qi, Min-Hsuan Tsai, Shen-Fu Tsai, Shiyu Chang,
and Liangliang Cao - now at IBM TJ Watson Research Center) and I (in
collaboration with Profs. Jiawei Han, Tarek Abdelzaher, and Dan Roth
at Illinois; Prof. Heng Ji at CUNY; Dr. Charu Aggarwal, IBM; Dr. Feng
Tang, HP Labs, and Prof. Jiebo Luo, University of Rocheter) are exploring
some of these issues [1–6]. And we hope that what we do will throw
some light on the Grand Challenge of Bridging the Semantic Gap.
References
[1] L. Cao, J. Yu, J. Luo, T. S. Huang, Enhancing semantic and geographic annotation of
web images via logistic canonical correlation regression, in: Proc. of ACM Multimedia, 2009.
[2] M.-H. Tsai, S.-F. Tsai, T. S. Huang, Hierarchical image feature extraction and classiﬁcation, in: Proc. of ACM Multimedia, 2010.

464

T.S. Huang / Image and Vision Computing 30 (2012) 463–464

[3] Y. Lin, F. Lv, S. Zhu, M. Yang, T. Cour, K. Yu, L. Cao, T. S. Huang, Large-scale image
classiﬁcation: Fast feature extraction and SVM training, in: IEEE Conference on
Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, 2011.
[4] G.-J. Qi, C. Aggarwal, Y. Rui, Q. Tian, S. Chang, T. Huang, Towards cross-category
knowledge propagation for learning visual concepts, in: IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, 2011.

[5] G.-J. Qi, C. Aggarwal, T. Huang, Towards semantic knowledge propagation from
text corpus to web images, in: Proc. of International World Wide Web conference,
2011.
[6] G.-J. Qi, C. Aggarwal, Q. Tian, H. Ji, T. Huang, Exploring context and content links in
social media: A latent space method, IEEE Transactions on Pattern Analysis and
Machine Intelligence, 2011.

