Image and Vision Computing 30 (2012) 478–479

Contents lists available at SciVerse ScienceDirect

Image and Vision Computing
journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/imavis

The role of computer vision in prosthetic vision ☆,☆☆
Nick Barnes ⁎
NICTA, The Australian National University, Bionic Vision Australia, Australia

a r t i c l e

i n f o

Article history:
Received 3 November 2011
Received in revised form 18 May 2012
Accepted 19 May 2012
Keywords:
Computer vision
Prosthetic vision
Bionic eye
Retinal implants
Orientation and mobility
Face recognition

a b s t r a c t
The cost of vision loss worldwide has been estimated at nearly $3 trillion (http://www.amdalliance.org/costof-blindness.html). Non-preventable diseases cause a signiﬁcant proportion of blindness in developed nations and will become more prevalent as people live longer. Prosthetic vision technologies including retinal
implants will play an important therapeutic role. Retinal implants convert an input image stream to visual
percepts via stimulation of the retina. This paper highlights some barriers to restoring functional human vision for current generation visual prosthetic devices that computer vision can help overcome. Such computer
vision is interactive, aiming to restore function including visuo-motor tasks and recognition.
© 2012 Elsevier B.V. Open access under CC BY-NC-ND license.

1. Introduction
Therapeutic implantable prosthetic vision devices, such as retinal
implants, aim to improve quality of life for recipients. This means restoring the ability to carry out everyday visual tasks. Across a range of
degree of blindness, people's requirements include reading and social
interaction, such as face and facial expression recognition. Individuals
with no light perception or almost no vision, also often make use of
aids to facilitate orientation and mobility. Currently, the restoration
of normal vision is not possible, however, a prosthetic vision that facilitates functional abilities may be achievable.
Two broad aims within computer vision are: solve real problems
through visually understanding the world; and, develop algorithms
that mimic biological vision. Typically, bio-mimetic systems can be
assessed by their ability to replicate performance, or function of a
simulation system (e.g., robot). Prosthetic vision offers a unique opportunity to develop bio-mimetic algorithms to address an important
problem of facilitating functional abilities for the visually impaired,
and directly verify algorithm effectiveness in restoring functional
abilities of the human visual system. The insight offered in solving
this grand challenge will lead to unique new algorithms in computer
vision, and unique new understanding of human visual function
☆ This paper has been recommended for acceptance by special issue Opinions
Editor Sinisa Todorovic.
☆☆ NICTA is funded by the Australian Government as represented by the Department
of Broadband, Communications, and the Digital Economy, and the Australian Research
Council (ARC) through the ICT Centre of Excellence Program. This research was also
supported in part by ARC through its Special Research Initiative (SRI) in Bionic Vision
Science and Technology grant to Bionic Vision Australia (BVA).
⁎ Corresponding author. Tel.: +61 2 6267 6226.
E-mail address: nick.barnes@nicta.com.au.
0262-8856 © 2012 Elsevier B.V. Open access under CC BY-NC-ND license.
doi:10.1016/j.imavis.2012.05.007

through these algorithms. New algorithms will need to be developed
to support interactive tasks that are real-time and low latency.
2. Types of prosthetic vision
A number of devices in development aim to restore visual function, including devices that employ electrical stimulation. Here, an
electrical ﬁeld is created in tissue using electrodes in an array. This
ﬁeld can activate neurons that fall within it, leading to percepts
known as phosphenes (e.g., [1,2]). The ﬁrst trails of a stimulation device began with cortical stimulation in the 1960s [3], and continue
also with optic nerve and retinal stimulation. Several major groups
are developing retinal stimulators, which are described by their relative anatomical position, including epi-retinal (e.g., [2]), sub-retinal
(e.g., [1]), as well as trans-scaleral and supra-choroidal. In most
approaches an external camera provides image streams that are
processed and the resulting stimulus passes wirelessly to the
implanted device. However, photodiodes on the implant are also possible [1]. Further, in optogenetic approaches, retinal ganglion cells
could be genetically modiﬁed to become photosensitive.
3. Vision processing to restore aspects of human vision
There are some key aspects of human vision that will be difﬁcult
for the current generation of prosthetic vision devices to restore.
Computer vision may help address difﬁculties. Resolution and foveal
density: in the vision science literature, the basic structure of the
human retina is well understood. The retina contains approximately
100 million photoreceptors, encoded by more than one million retinal
ganglion cells. Photoreceptor cones (day vision) are most dense in the
fovea (central 1 degree of the retina) and the ratio to ganglion cells is

N. Barnes / Image and Vision Computing 30 (2012) 478–479

479

Fig. 1. Navigation environment corridor with an obstacle: viewed with a grid of 30 × 35 simulated phosphenes showing intensity values, and depth values. Thanks to Paulette Lieby
and Adele Scott for the simulated phosphene images and the software to produce them.

high to facilitate high acuity vision. In comparison, in human trials the
number of resulting percepts is restricted by the number of electrodes
on the device. An implant with 1500 electrodes is the largest total resolution that has been achieved to date [1]. Ideally, optogenetics could
lead to dense stimulation, though the approach is yet to be trialed in
humans. Currently, considerable light intensity is required for activation of many retinal ganglion cells for which projection external to
the eye is proposed [4]. Projecting to large numbers of ganglion
cells at the speed of normal human vision will present a signiﬁcant
engineering challenge. Further, where disease or pathology contributed to blindness, residual damage is likely to restrict the extent of
visual function restoration, though human trials have demonstrated
people can at least see phosphenes (e.g., [1–3]). Eye movements and
visual ﬁxation are responsible for directing foveal vision for tasks
that require acuity, such as reading, face and object recognition. Systems including an external camera will need to support ﬁxation as
eye movements no longer control viewing direction. Wearable eye
tracking may help address this, and computer vision techniques
excel here, though current wearable systems' performance may
not be adequate. Alternatively, with eye resident photodiodes [1]
eye movements can control direction of vision. However, sufﬁcient
peripheral visual ﬁeld is required to ﬁnd objects of interest in the
scene, and to hold them ﬁxated under relative motion. Further, to
support the closed-loop cycle time of eye movements for smooth
pursuit would require rapid stimulation cycle times, which may
prove difﬁcult when stimulating with large numbers of electrodes.
Interpretation of depth: Normal human vision is highly effective at
recovering depth information, using binocular stereo for nearby objects, and visual sensitivity to interpret motion cues and monocular
shading and shadow. Bilateral implants are unlikely in the near
term, and when available, it is uncertain whether electrical stimulation will be able to restore the necessary neural structures associated with depth perception such as ocular dominance columns.
Further, human depth perception performance is related to an
individual's visual acuity. So the low visual acuity of prosthetic vision
will restrict binocular vision, and depth interpretation from motion
and monocular cues.
Incoming light is perceived over a large dynamic range in human
vision, while current implantable visual prosthetic human trial results
report up to around 10 differentiable levels of stimulation. This will
impose restrictions on prosthetic vision, including on the ability of
implant recipients to interpret depth.
4. On the role of vision processing
Firstly, image processing methods are needed to convert incoming
image stream to appropriate resolution and dynamic range. This includes operations such as downsampling, smoothing, and histogram
equalization, which are well understood. A device may perform processing aimed at replicating function at the retinal ganglion cells.

Visual ﬁxation is key to recognition of complex objects such as
faces. Computer vision can play a role in restoring such interactive
ability. The implant recipient needs to select the object to be ﬁxated,
probably including by directing their gaze, or camera, toward it. Then
vision processing can zoom to the object with sufﬁcient resolution
and keep it ﬁxated for long enough for face and expression recognition, compensating for lighting changes and movement of the observer and object.
Identifying traversable space and obstacles are key requirements
for supporting orientation and mobility. However, with the limited
dynamic range of current generation prosthetic devices, in environments where ﬂoor and obstacle contrast is not clear, direct mapping
of a range of intensity across a whole image may not be sufﬁcient. Vision processing can play a role in situations like this, detecting, and
ensuring the visibility of key scene elements such as the ﬂoor and obstacles in the limited dynamic range. Fig. 1 shows a corridor environment with an overhanging obstacle. Because it is high contrast, the
structure is clearly visible when rendered directly as downsampled
intensity in a simulated prosthetic vision representation of 1050 visual ﬁelds (phosphenes). The last image shows this rendered as depth,
found using point grey stereo. Here the structure is clear also, and
the overhanging obstacle can be clearly discerned.
In terms of the visual resolution, there is a clear trade-off between
the spread of the visual elements and ﬁeld of view. If a phosphene
covers a visual area much larger than a trip-hazard, it may become difﬁcult to see. However, with a narrow ﬁeld of view, orientation becomes
difﬁcult and visual search is needed.
5. Conclusion
Computer vision will play a key role in providing prosthetic vision to
alleviate key restrictions of blindness such as with orientation and mobility and face/object recognition. Prosthetic vision offers the grand
challenge of creating computer vision algorithms to interact with the
human visual system to restore task performance. In the next few
years we will see computer vision incorporated into therapeutic visual
prosthetic devices.
References
[1] E. Zrenner, K. Bartz-Schmidt, H. Benav, D. Besch, A. Bruckmann, V.-P. Gabel, F. Gekeler,
U. Greppaier, A. Harscher, S. Kibbel, J. Kock, A. Kusnyerik, T. Peters, K. Stingl, A. Stett, P.
Szurman, B. Wilhelm, R. Wilke, Subretinal electronic chips allow blind patients to read
letters and combine them to words, Proc. R. Soc. B Biol. Sci. 278 (2011) 1489–1497.
[2] M. S. Humayun, J. D. Dorn, L. D. Cruz, G. Dagnelie, J.-A. Sachel, P. E. Stranga, A. V.
Cideciyan, J. L. Duncan, D. Eliott, E. Filley, A. C. Ho, A. Santos, A. B. Safran, A. Arditi, L. V.
Del Priore, R. J. G. for the Argus II Study Group, Interim results from the international
trial of second sight's visual prosthesis, Ophthalmology in press 119:779–88.
[3] G.S. Brindley, W.S. Lewin, The sensations produced by electrical stimulation of the
visual cortex, J. Physiol. 196 (1968) 479–493.
[4] P.A. Degenaar, Optogenetic Visual Prosthesis—Engineering the Optoelectronic
Stimulator, In: ARVO, 2011.

