Computer-Aided Design 43 (2011) 1477–1484

Contents lists available at SciVerse ScienceDirect

Computer-Aided Design
journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/cad

Blends of canal surfaces from polyhedral medial transform representations
Bohumír Bastl a , Bert Jüttler b , Miroslav Lávička a , Tino Schulz b,∗
a

University of West Bohemia, Department of Mathematics, Plzeň, Czech Republic

b

Johannes Kepler University of Linz, Institute of Applied Geometry, Austria

article
Keywords:
Medial axis
Medial structure
Blend surface
Canal surface

info

abstract
We present a new method for constructing G1 blending surfaces between an arbitrary number of canal
surfaces. The topological relation of the canal surfaces is specified via a convex polyhedron and the
design technique is based on a generalization of the medial surface transform. The resulting blend surface
consists of trimmed envelopes of one- and two-parameter families of spheres. Blending the medial surface
transform instead of the surface itself is shown to be a powerful and elegant approach for blend surface
generation. The performance of our approach is demonstrated by several examples.
© 2011 Elsevier Ltd. Open access under CC BY-NC-ND license.

1. Introduction
Blending is an important operation in any geometric modeling
system. Given a number of surfaces, which are often called primary
surfaces, the purpose of blending is to generate one or more
auxiliary (secondary) surfaces that create a smooth transition
between the primary ones. The final object then consists of
trimmed primary surfaces and the auxiliary ones.
Blending surfaces are needed for rounding edges and corners of
mechanical parts, or for smoothly joining separated objects. Some
types of blend surfaces (which require the addition of material
to an existing object) are called fillets, but there seems to be no
universally accepted terminology.
Many engineering objects consists mostly of simple surfaces
(segments of planes, cylinders, cones, tori and spheres) except
for the blending surfaces, which require true free-form surfaces.
Thus, blend surface creation is often the first challenge where it
is necessary to introduce free-form design tools into a geometric
modeling system.
Due to its technical importance, blending has continuously
attracted the geometric design community since many years.
Detailed introductions with any related references are provided in
the two books [1,2].
The existing approaches to blending can be classified according
to the type of surfaces which are used to describe the blend surface.
The rolling ball blend (see e.g. [3] and the references cited therein),
which probably represents the earliest existing method, uses a
procedural description of the blend surface. In its simplest form, a ball

∗

Corresponding author. Tel.: +43 0 732 2468.
E-mail addresses: bastl@kma.zcu.cz (B. Bastl), bert.juettler@jku.at (B. Jüttler),
lavicka@kma.zcu.cz (M. Lávička), tino.schulz@jku.at (T. Schulz).
0010-4485 © 2011 Elsevier Ltd. Open access under CC BY-NC-ND license.
doi:10.1016/j.cad.2011.08.014

of constant radius rolls on two primary surfaces, thereby creating
the blend surface as its envelope. The blend then consists of
segments of pipe surfaces which are, however, often approximated
by other surfaces [4]. A generalization leads to variable radius
rolling ball blends, consisting of segments of canal surfaces [5]. A
new method for controlling the radius of a rolling ball blend has
been proposed recently in [6].
Parametric blend surfaces are often favored in applications, since
they can easily be added to an existing boundary representation
of a solid using trimmed surfaces. These blending surfaces can be
defined by specifying contact curves on the given primary surfaces
and then creating a blend surface that is smoothly joined to the
given surfaces. In 1994, a survey of blending methods of this type
was presented by Vida et al. [7]. The special case of parametric
blending surfaces between pairs of quadric surfaces was addressed
in [8].
Recent results on parametric blend surfaces include the article
[9], which uses a partial reparameterization of the base surfaces, as
well as techniques for blending subdivision surfaces [10].
When using parametric blend surfaces, however, the flexibility of these surfaces is rather limited, since the mathematical description of these surfaces requires to define them as embeddings
of a parameter domain. While this works well for blends between
only two surfaces, the description of multi-sided blends (e.g. the
house-corner blend, which requires a six-sided surface) is not that
obvious. Consequently, special techniques for the construction of
vertex blends have been designed [11,12]. In a recent paper, surfaces defined in polar coordinates were used to define blends between multiple surfaces and to fill n-sided holes [13].
In order to optimize the shape of blend surfaces, numerical
methods for solving geometric partial differential equations have
been studied in [14].
On the other hand, the use of implicitly defined blend surfaces
offers more flexibility for designing blends, since their shape is

1478

B. Bastl et al. / Computer-Aided Design 43 (2011) 1477–1484

not restricted to be obtained as an embedding of a parameter
domain. Due to this flexible topology, it is easier to obtain complex,
multi-sided blends. The classical texts on use of implicit surfaces
for blending include [15,16]. Since then, blending using implicit
representations has been discussed by a large number of authors.
We refer to [17–22] as a few representative references. Besides
blends based on (piecewise) polynomial representations, also
procedurally defined implicit representations were used to create
blends [23].
Another possibility to classify blending surfaces is to analyze
the class of primary surfaces that can be dealt with. Here, special
attention has been paid to blending surfaces between canal surfaces
and more generally, of ringed surfaces. In particular, it has been
proposed to use patches of Dupin cyclides as blends between canal
surfaces; see the chapter on cyclides in [1].
These cyclides can be defined as the envelopes of all spheres
that touch three given spheres; see [24]. They are algebraic surfaces
of degree four and they possess simple rational parameterizations
with the parameter lines being simultaneously lines of curvature.
Moreover, the class of Dupin cyclides is closed under offsetting.
Cyclide blends between two cones were analyzed in [25]. By
generalizing the constructions of biarcs to Laguerre geometry it
was shown how to generate blends between general canal surfaces
using double-cyclide surfaces in [26].
In a recent paper, Krasauskas [27] creates branching blends of
natural quadrics that are also surfaces with rational offsets. These
blend surfaces are defined as envelopes of special two-parameter
families of planes.
We present a new approach to create blend surfaces between
an arbitrary number of canal surfaces, which also covers the case
of branching blends discussed by Krasauskas. Our approach is
based on the use of a medial structure. Recall that the medial axis
representation of a solid allows to represent its boundary as the
envelope of two- and one-parameter families of spheres, which
correspond to the sheets and to the seams of the medial axis,
respectively. These spheres are the boundaries of the maximum
inscribed balls (with respect to inclusion) of the given solid object.
The medial structures has become a popular research area in
recent years — mathematicians have studied the properties of
these representations, and computer scientists and engineers have
developed a variety of algorithms for computing and using these
models; cf. [28] and references therein for a detailed survey of this
topic.
In addition to the use of the medial axis, which turns out
to be too stiff for the design of blending surfaces in certain
situations, we propose to design blend surfaces using a polyhedral
medial structure. This structure again consists of sheets and seams
representing centers and radii of inscribed balls. As the main
difference to the medial axis, however, these balls are not required
to be maximal, but only to touch the boundary in at least one point.
If such a medial structure is given, then it is possible to recover
the boundary of the object – and hence the blend surface – as
envelopes of certain one- and two-parameter families of spheres.
Not all branches of these envelopes then contribute to the blend.
By adding constants to the (non-constant) function specifying the
radius of these balls it is possible to obtain the offsets of the blend
surfaces.
The remainder of this paper is organized as follows. The
next section summarizes several fundamental facts concerning
the representation of one- and two-parameter families as curves
and surfaces in the Minkowski space R3,1 . Section 3 introduces
the polyhedral medial transform representation which serves as
the tool to create blends between canal surfaces. The details of
the construction of single-sheeted and polyhedral blends will be
presented in Sections 4 and 5, respectively. After presenting several
examples, which illustrate the capabilities of our method, we
conclude this paper.

2. Preliminaries
In this section we briefly summarize some fundamental notions
and basic properties of the four-dimensional Minkowski space
R3,1 and the medial axis/surface (MA/MS) and medial axis/surface
transform (MAT/MST) representations.
2.1. Minkowski space R3,1
The Minkowski space R3,1 is a four-dimensional real affine space
which is equipped with the indefinite inner product

⟨u, v⟩ = u⊤ Jv = u1 v1 + u2 v2 + u3 v3 − u4 v4

(1)

defined by the diagonal matrix
J = (Ji,j )i,j=1,2,3,4 = diag(1, 1, 1, −1),

(2)

where u = (u1 , u2 , u3 , u4 ) , v = (v1 , v2 , v3 , v4 ) . The four axes
spanned by the vectors (δi,1 , δi,2 , δi,3 , δi,4 )⊤ , i = 1, . . . , 4, will be
called the x-, y-, z- and r-axis, respectively.
The squared norm of a vector defined by ‖v‖2 = ⟨v, v⟩, can
be positive, negative or zero. We distinguish three types of vectors
(and thus also of corresponding lines with these directions): spacelike if ‖v‖2 > 0, time-like if ‖v‖2 < 0, and light-like (or isotropic) if
‖v‖2 = 0. Analogously for d > 1, a d-dimensional linear subspace
of R3,1 is called space-, time- or light-like if the restriction of the
quadratic form defined by J is positive definite, indefinite nondegenerate or degenerate, respectively.
Let a be a point in R3,1 and xˆ = (X , Y , Z , 0)⊤ . Then
⊤

⊤

⟨ˆx − a, xˆ − a⟩ = 0,

(3)

defines a sphere in R centered at (a1 , a2 , a3 ) and with the
oriented radius a4 . We recall that the correspondence between
points in R3,1 and oriented spheres in R3 can be established via
the so called cyclographic mapping; cf. [29,26].
3

⊤

2.2. Curves in R3,1
Considering a curve c(t ) = (ˆc(t ), r (t ))⊤ ⊂ R3,1 , t ∈ I ⊆ R, its
points correspond to spheres whose centers trace the curve cˆ (t ) in
R3 and possess the radii r (t ). The envelope of this one-parameter
family of spheres

F (t ) : ⟨ˆx − c(t ), xˆ − c(t )⟩ = 0

(4)

is called a canal surface and the curve cˆ (t ) is called its spine curve. If
r (t ) = const., we obtain a pipe surface. The defining equations for
the canal surface C are

F (t ) = 0,
′

F ′ (t ) = 0,

(5)

where F denotes the derivative with respect to t.
The equation F ′ (t ) = 0 describes the plane perpendicular to
the derivative vector c′ (t ). Thus the canal surface C contains a oneparameter set of the so called characteristic circles F (t ) ∩ F ′ (t ).
Note that for c(t ) being straight lines we obtain cylinders and
cones.
The envelope of the one-parameter family of spheres may not
be real, depending on the relation between cˆ ′ (t ) and r ′ (t ). More
precisely, the envelope is real if c′ (t ) is not time-like. In particular,
if c′ (t ) is light-like for a parameter value t0 , then the plane F ′ (t0 ) =
0 is tangent to the sphere F (t0 ) = 0 and the corresponding
characteristic circle degenerates to a point.
Moreover, as proved in [30,31], a canal surface given by a rational curve c(t ) possesses always a rational parameterization.
However, it should be noted that the computation of a rational
parameterization is still a challenging problem, which is equivalent to the SOS (sum of squares) problem for non-negative
polynomials.

B. Bastl et al. / Computer-Aided Design 43 (2011) 1477–1484

2.3. Surfaces in R3,1
Considering a surface s(u, v) = (ˆs(u, v), r (u, v))⊤ ⊂ R3,1 ,
(u, v) ∈ I ⊆ R2 , its points correspond to spheres whose centers
trace the surface sˆ (u, v) in R3 and possess the radii r (u, v). The
envelope of this two-parameter family of spheres

F (u, v) : ⟨ˆx − s(u, v), xˆ − s(u, v)⟩ = 0

(6)

is generally a surface in R3 . The defining equations for the envelope
surface B are

F (u, v) = 0,

Fu (u, v) = 0,

Fv (u, v) = 0,

(7)

where Fu , Fv denote the partial derivatives with respect to u, v ,
respectively. Solving (7) we arrive at the coordinates of a point
b = (X , Y , Z )⊤ of the envelope surface B described by the closedform envelope formula (cf. [32]) in the form
b± (u, v) = sˆ (u, v) +

r
Cˆ

(w ±

√

C · (ˆsu × sˆ v )),

(8)

their spine curves. Hence, in the case of canal surfaces we speak
about the medial axis (MA).
By appending the corresponding ball radii r to the points
(x, y, z )⊤ of the medial axis/surface MA/MS, we obtain the
medial axis/surface transform MAT/MST consisting from points
(x, y, z , r )⊤ . Thus all maximal inscribed oriented balls, can be identified as the points in the four-dimensional Minkowski space R3,1 .
In general, the medial surface transforms can consist of
components of dimensions two, one, and zero, which are called
sheets, seams and junctions, respectively. Their points correspond to
maximal inscribed balls which, generically, touch the boundary in
two, three, and four points, respectively. The sheets meet in seams,
and the seams meet in junctions.
Finally, let us emphasize that when starting from the medial
surface/axis transform as a shape representation, one has to
guarantee that the associated domain boundary is a valid boundary
(real, without self-intersections, etc.). More details about the
validity of MATs/MSTs can be found e.g. in [37–39].
3. Polyhedral medial transform representation

where

ˆ − Fˆ 2 ,
Cˆ = Eˆ G

1479

C = EG − F 2 .

(9)

The components E , F , G of the first fundamental form of s(u, v)
are computed using the Minkowski inner product in R3,1 , whereas
ˆ of the first fundamental form of sˆ (u, v) are
the components Eˆ , Fˆ , G
determined using the standard Euclidean inner product in R3 . The
vector w = w(u, v) in (8) consists of polynomials of degree four
in xu , yu , zu , ru and xv , yv , zv , rv ; see [32] for more details. Clearly,
the envelope is real if C ≥ 0.
Unlike the case of canal surfaces, not all envelope surfaces given
by rational s(u, v) are rational. This was a motivation for introducing the so called MOS surfaces in [32]. The parameterization s(u, v)
is called an MOS parameterization if there exists a bivariate polynomial or rational function σ (u, v), such that it holds
EG − F 2 = σ (u, v)2 .

(10)
3,1

Then, the surface in R having an MOS parameterization is called
an MOS surface.
A distinguishing property of MOS surfaces is that not only
both branches of the envelope but also their offsets possess an
exact rational parametric representation, i.e., the envelope surfaces
belong to the class of the so called surfaces with Pythagorean
normals (PN surfaces).
It has been recently proved in [33] that quadratic triangular
Bézier surfaces in R3,1 possess the MOS property. A related study
followed in [34,35] and an algorithm for computing boundaries
and trimmed offsets of volumes given by piecewise quadratic
medial surface transforms was designed and studied in [36]. As
polynomial quadratic patches in R3,1 are capable of producing C 1
approximations to free-form surfaces considered as medial surface
transforms, this algorithm can be also used for computing rational
approximations of volume boundaries and all their offsets.
2.4. MA/MS and MAT/MST representations
Consider a spatial domain Ω ⊂ R3 with a smooth boundary.
The medial locus, or skeleton, of this domain is constructed as the
closure of the locus of all centers of maximal balls inscribed into
Ω . The local thickness of the object is measured by the radii r of
these maximal balls.
Except in special cases, the medial locus is a two-dimensional
medial surface (MS). Degeneracies occur only for spheres when
the medial locus is a single point, or for the canal surfaces
(e.g. cylinders, cones, Dupin cyclides) when the medial loci are

In this section we will introduce the notion of a polyhedral
medial transform (MT) representation, which we will use later for
the construction of blend surfaces.
Recall that the medial surface transform of a domain Ω ⊂ R3
with a piecewise smooth boundary generically consists of several
components with different dimensions. Moreover, if the medial
surface transform is known it is possible to completely reconstruct
the corresponding domain.
Instead of using the medial axis as a representation of shape, we
consider shapes that can be reconstructed from a different, more
general medial representation. Let P ⊂ R3 be a convex polyhedron
with d ≥ 2 faces and boundary surface ∂ P. A set Q ⊂ R3,1 is called
a polyhedral medial transform (MT) with shape P if the following
conditions are satisfied:
(i) Q is homeomorphic to P.
(ii) There exists a continuous, piecewise smooth mapping F :
∂ P → ∂ Q that is regular and smooth in the interior of each
face of P and with the property that all edges are mapped to
regular curves.
(iii) For each face f ⊂ ∂ P, all points on F(f ) (also on boundaries
and vertices) possess a well defined tangent plane (the limit
of the tangent planes, when we go to the vertex, is unique).
(iv) All edges and vertices of Q are strictly convex.
(v) The radius (i.e., the fourth coordinate of Q) is strictly positive
The boundary ∂ Q of a polyhedral medial transform Q consists of a
collection of d smooth surfaces. Each of these surfaces corresponds
to exactly one face of P and their mutual adjacency relation is
inherited from P. One may think of Q as a feature-preserving
distortion of P, embedded in R3,1 .
Note that the mapping F which is required to exist in (ii) is
only assumed to be regular and smooth in the interior of each
face, hence the images of the faces can be patches with singular
vertices. Later we will use this possibility to define blend surfaces.
Nevertheless, (iii) guarantees that these patches possess a welldefined tangent plane everywhere.
A domain Ω ⊂ R3 is said to possess a polyhedral MT representation of shape P, if its boundary ∂ Ω can be reconstructed from
a polyhedral medial transform with shape P, i.e., if there exists a
polyhedral medial transform Q such that for

ˆ = π (Q) ∪
Ω



{x ∈ R3 , ‖(x, 0)⊤ − q‖ = 0}

q∈∂ Q

ˆ.
with π : R3,1 → R3 , (x, r ) → x we have ∂ Ω ⊂ ∂ Ω

(11)

1480

B. Bastl et al. / Computer-Aided Design 43 (2011) 1477–1484

As the envelope of a one-parameter family of spheres can
be also generated as the envelope of a one-parameter family of
cones/cylinders of revolution (cf. [29]) we can reduce studying the
blends of canal surfaces to simpler input primitives, i.e., to cones
and cylinders.
4.1. Three curves
We consider three canal surfaces C1 , C2 , C3 represented by their
MATs c1 , c2 , c3 in R3,1 . The polyhedral medial surface transform
representing a single-sheeted blend can be then constructed by the
following three steps:
(i) Determine three points p1 , p2 , p3 representing end characteristic circles and associated three directional vectors t1 , t2 , t3
at these points from MATs c1 , c2 , c3 , which are data describing
the G1 join.
(ii) Construct a suitable Bézier triangle patch Q in R3,1 interpolating the given data {p1 , p2 , p3 ; t1 , t2 , t3 }.
(iii) Find the associated ∂ Ω .
Steps (i) and (iii) are straightforward. Hence, we describe only
Step (ii) in more detail.
Step (ii). We construct a Bézier triangle patch of degree five, which
is the smallest possible degree of the patch to fulfill the necessary
conditions.

Fig. 1. The projection π(Q) of a polyhedral medial transform (top) and the
reconstructed domain Ω (bottom).

Note that the norm ‖.‖ is measured in R3,1 , hence the second
part of this formula contributes the points on the boundaries of
all spheres represented by points on the boundary ∂ Q. The first
part π(Q) was added in order to avoid inner boundaries that might
appear otherwise.
A very simple example with a medial tetrahedron is shown in
Fig. 1. The boundary of the associated solid consists of six pieces
of canal surfaces, which correspond to the edges, four spherical
segments, which correspond to the vertices, and four surface
patches, which correspond to the faces of the polyhedron. More
precisely, the surface patches are planes and the canal surfaces are
cones and cylinders of revolution.
In general, if the values of the radius function are sufficiently
small, a domain with a polyhedral MT representation of shape
P will be bounded by a collection of pieces of spheres, trimmed
canal surfaces and generalized, one-sided offsets. Moreover, in that
case, the numbers of spheres, canal surfaces and generalized offsets
match the numbers of vertices, edges and faces of P, respectively.
In the special case d = 2, the polyhedron P degenerates into
a planar polygon. The two boundary surfaces of Q will be equal to
each other as well as equal to the medial axis (or surface) transform
of Ω . Thus, in this situation, the polyhedral MT representation
becomes the usual medial transform representation.
We will now use medial polyhedrons to design blends between
several canal surfaces.
4. Single-sheeted blends of canal surfaces
In this section we will focus on single-sheeted blends which
are nothing else than special cases of the polyhedral ones,
where the medial polyhedron degenerates into a single face. For
more details about the mathematical properties of the medial
representations and the relation between it and the corresponding
domain boundary; see [28].
We start with blending of three canal surfaces represented by
their spine curves and associated radii. Subsequently, we modify
this design approach to generate branching blends and general
case of n-way blends.

(a) Initialization:
The corner control points of the constructed patch are directly
the input points, i.e., b500 = p1 , b050 = p2 , b005 = p3 .
Both neighboring control points of pi have to lie on the line
determined by pi and ti . Further, to have a well-defined tangent
plane also at a singularly parametrized corner point, the control
points bα , α = (ijk) ∈ {(311), (131), (113)}, have to satisfy a
certain linear condition.
(b) Boundary optimization:
We use the second order differences of control points, i.e., bα −
2bα+1 + bα+2 . We choose this method in order to maintain
cylinders/cones and to minimize the curvature along the
boundary.
(c) Optimization of interior control points:
The remaining points are determined by minimizing the sum
of the squared distances of neighboring control points.
Clearly, one might consider other things to minimize in step
(b), such as curvature variation. However, this may not reproduce
cylinders and cones.
Fig. 2 shows an example of a 3-way blend (bottom) along with
the corresponding polyhedral medial structure (top). The blend
surface connects three given cylinders with different radii and nonintersecting axes. It consists of two generalized offset surfaces (red)
and three canal surfaces (blue) which correspond to the edges and
faces of the medial structure.
4.2. Two curve branching
The designed method from the previous subsection can be
immediately used also for the construction of branching blends.
This is guaranteed by using the boundary optimization in Step (ii)
which enables to preserve the shape of cylinders/cones.
A series of examples is shown in Fig. 3. We visualize several
branching blends between two given cylinders. The construction
of the medial surface reproduces lines as boundary curves, hence
it automatically preserves the bigger cylinder, creating the desired
branching blend.
4.3. Free n-way blend
Finally we describe a construction of an n-way blend. If not just
three, but n > 3 cylinders/cones Ci with prescribed end circles
are given, a blend surface can be generated by replacing the Bézier
triangle in Step (ii) with a suitable n-sided patch.

B. Bastl et al. / Computer-Aided Design 43 (2011) 1477–1484

1481

Fig. 4. 4-way blend of two cylinders.

Fig. 2. Examples of a 3-way blend.

Fig. 3. Examples of 3-way blends used for obtaining branching blends.

We demonstrate this for n = 4 on several examples, cf. Figs. 4–6
which show two different blends between four cylinders and two
cones.
In the last example, the single-sheeted blend does not preserve
the two cones, since none of them corresponds to an edge of the
four-sided medial surface.
The situation is different in the next example, which is shown
in Fig. 7. Here, the two given cylinders correspond to two of the
four edges of the medial surface, thereby creating a blend surface
which preserves cylinders/cones. The shape of the blend, however,
is not really satisfying and becomes even worse when the angle
between the cylinders approaches 90 degrees. In this situation it is
more appropriate to use polyhedral blends.
5. Polyhedral blends
Although the single-sheeted blend is rather elegant and flexible,
it still possesses certain limitations. Due to its construction, every
canal surface must have exactly two adjacent canal surfaces.

Fig. 5. Examples of 4-way blend of two cylinders.

Thus even for certain relatively simple configurations, e.g. the one
shown in Fig. 7, the shape of the obtained blend surface is different
from the shape one would expect.
However, other configurations of canal surfaces may be blended
properly by constructing medial polyhedra with more faces.
For blending n canal surfaces, like in Section 4, one picks a
convex polyhedron P that reflects the topological structure of the
canal surfaces: characteristic circles correspond to vertices and a
polynomial canal surface corresponds to an edge, including its two
vertices. Again, a one-to-one correspondence between vertices and
characteristic circles is needed.
For each face of P we can now apply the single-sheeted
algorithm from the previous section to obtain the complete

1482

B. Bastl et al. / Computer-Aided Design 43 (2011) 1477–1484

Table 1
Summary of the blend construction.
Blending n canal surfaces with MATs c1 , . . . , cn ∈ R3,1
(i) Determine n points p1 , . . . , pn representing the characteristic circles and associated directional vectors t1 , . . . , tn at these points from MATs c1 , . . . , cn , which are
data describing the G1 join.
(ii) Choose a convex polyhedra P with n vertices, specifying the topological relation of the canal surfaces. Each vertex corresponds to exactly one characteristic circle.
(iii) For each edge of P, find a quintic Bézier curve in R3,1 that interpolates the points and direction vectors corresponding to the vertices of the edge. Specify its control
points by minimizing the sum of squared second order differences in between them.
(vi) For each face of P, find a multi-sided surface patch in R3,1 that interpolates the Bézier curves corresponding to the edges of the face and possesses well-defined
tangent planes at its vertices. For a three- or four-sided Bézier surface patch, specify its control points by minimizing the sum of squared distances in between them.
(v) Find the associated boundary, i.e., the blend surface, by computing and trimming the envelopes of the one- and two-parameter families of spheres that correspond
to the constructed curves and surfaces.

Fig. 6. Single-sheeted four way blend of two cones with coplanar axes.

Fig. 8. Tetrahedral blend of two cylinders.

5.1. Tetrahedral blend

Fig. 7. Single-sheeted four way blend of two skew cylinders.

medial polyhedron. Adjacent patches will necessarily have common boundary curves, since the optimization of each singular
boundary curve only depends on the two given points and tangents
it connects.
Thus the construction of complex medial polyhedrons can
be completely reduced to the construction of single-sheeted
medial polyhedrons. Of course, the trimming of the constructed
boundary surface needs to be modified, but however, the amount
of reasonably treatable configurations is greatly enhanced. In
Table 1 the whole construction process is summarized.
In the following we will present some examples to illustrate the
usefulness of this approach.

This first example was motivated by the fact that with a singlesheeted approach, one is not able to yield a reasonable blending
surface of two close or even intersecting, non-parallel cylinders.
Except for the case that the axes of the two cylinders intersect, the
single-sheeted approach always produces either a non-symmetric
or a non-interpolating blend.
By choosing a tetrahedron instead of a four-sided patch, we
are able to create a reasonable and symmetric blend. Therefore
we identified the given cylinders with two skew edges of the
tetrahedron.
Fig. 8 shows an example of such a tetrahedral blend between
two partially intersecting cylinders. The upper picture shows the
projection π (Q) of the polyhedral MT and the final blend – which
consists of six trimmed canal surfaces (including the cylinders) and
four one-sided, generalized offsets – is shown in the lower part.
5.2. Cubical blend
Naturally, there is a configuration where a multi-sheeted
approach turns out to be more suitable: blending multiple canal
surfaces whose tangents at the endpoints are far away from being
in one plane.

B. Bastl et al. / Computer-Aided Design 43 (2011) 1477–1484

1483

Fig. 9. Blend of eight cylinders.

Fig. 9 shows a polyhedral blending of eight cylinders, having
their axes equally distributed in space. All cylinder axes intersect
in one point and the final blend surface (bottom) consists of twelve
trimmed canal surfaces and six generalized, one-side offsets.
5.3. Pyramidal blend
As a final example we consider a cylinder which splits up into
four cones. The defining convex polyhedron is a square pyramid
and the cylinder corresponds to the apex (cf. Fig. 10). The medial
polyhedron consists of four triangular patches and one additional
quadrilateral surface patch.
6. Conclusion
We presented a simple but powerful method for creating
blend surfaces between an arbitrary number of canal surfaces.

Fig. 10. Blend of four cones and a cylinder.

Our approach is based on a medial structure which can be seen
as a generalization of the medial axis/medial surface transform of
a solid object. By preserving existing canal surfaces, our approach
can also be used to generate branching blends. The blend surfaces
consist of canal surfaces and generalized offsets, which correspond
to the edges and the faces of the medial transform structure,
respectively.
There are several questions associated with our construction
that deserve additional investigations.

1484

B. Bastl et al. / Computer-Aided Design 43 (2011) 1477–1484

The first one concerns the regularity of the generated blend
surfaces. It is relatively simple to use the existing conditions to
analyze a posteriori the regularity of the blend surfaces. However,
it would be more desirable to find sufficient conditions on the
shape of the given canal surfaces that guarantee regularity.
The second question is related to the parameterization of the
obtained blend surfaces. Currently, we generate parameterizations
that involve square-root functions. Thus, an approximation step is
required in order to convert them into the accepted NURBS format.
An approximation of the medial transform representation, e.g., by
piecewise quadratic patches, would allow us to use the techniques
for exact parameterizations of the envelopes developed in [36].
Finally, the construction is currently limited to G1 smooth
blend surfaces. The construction of blends with higher order
of smoothness requires additional conditions on the medial
transform representations. It would be interesting to analyze them
and to see how they can be used for designing shapes.
Acknowledgments
B. Bastl and M. Lávička have been supported by Research Plan
MSM 4977751301. B. Jüttler and T. Schulz have been supported
by the Austrian Science fund, project S9202. All authors were
supported by the Austrian/Czech AKTION 2009/5(MEB060905).
References
[1] Farin GE, Hoschek J. Handbook of computer aided geometric design. North
Holland; 2002.
[2] Hoschek J, Lasser D. Fundamentals of computer-aided geometric design. AK
Peters; 1993.
[3] Lukacs G. Differential geometry of G1 variable radius rolling ball blend surfaces.
Computer-Aided Geometric Design 1998;15:585–613.
[4] Farouki RA, Sverrison R. Approximation of rolling-ball blends for free-form
parametric surfaces. Computer-Aided Design 1996;28:871–8.
[5] Chuang JH, Hwang WC. Variable-radius blending by constrained spine
generation. The Visual Computer 1997;13(7):316–29.
[6] Whited B, Rossignac J. Relative blending. Computer-Aided Design 2009;41:
456–62.
[7] Vida J, Martin RR, Varady T. A survey of blending methods that use parametric
surfaces. Computer-Aided Design 1994;26(5):341–65.
[8] Wallner J, Pottmann H. Rational blending surfaces between quadrics.
Computer Aided Geometric Design 1997;14(5):407–19.
[9] Song Q, Wang J. Generating Gn parametric blending surfaces based on
partial reparameterization of base surfaces. Computer-Aided Design 2007;39:
953–63.
[10] Hui KC, Lai YH. Smooth blending of subdivision surfaces. Computer-Aided
Design 2006;38:786–99.
[11] Varady T, Rockwood A. Geometric construction for setback vertex blending.
Computer-Aided Design 1997;29:413–25.
[12] Zhou P, Qian WH. Polyhedral vertex blending with setbacks using rational
s-patches. Computer Aided Geometric Design 2010;27:233–44.
[13] Shi KL, Yong JH, Sun JG, Paul JC. Gn blending multiple surfaces in polar
coordinates. Computer-Aided Design 2010;42:479–94.

[14] Xu G. Mixed finite element methods for geometric modeling using general
fourth order geometric flows. Computer Aided Geometric Design 2009;26:
378–95.
[15] Hoffmann C, Hopcroft J. The potential method for blending surfaces and
corners. In: Farin GE, editor. Geometric modeling: algorithms and new trends.
SIAM; 1987. p. 347–65.
[16] Warren J. Blending algebraic surfaces. ACM Transactions on Graphics (TOG)
1989;8(4):263–78.
[17] Hartmann E. Blending of implicit surfaces with functional splines. ComputerAided Design 1990.
[18] Hartmann E. Gn -continuous connections between normal ringed surfaces.
Computer aided Geometric Design 2001;18(8):751–70.
[19] Wu TR, Zhou Y. On blending of several quadratic algebraic surfaces. Computer
Aided Geometric Design 2000;17(8):759–66.
[20] Zhu CG, Wang RH, Shi X, Liu F. Functional splines with different degrees
of smoothness and their applications. Computer-Aided Design 2008;40(5):
616–24.
[21] Fang ME, Wang GZ, Ma WY. N-way blending problem of circular quadrics.
Science China Information Sciences 2010;53(8):1546–54.
[22] Mou H, Zhao G, Wang Z, Su Z. Simultaneous blending of convex polyhedra by
algebraic splines. Computer-Aided Design 2007;39(11):1003–11.
[23] Hartmann E. Parametric Gn blending of curves and surfaces. The Visual
Computer 2001;17(1):1–13.
[24] Dutta D, Martin RR, Pratt MJ. Cyclides in surface and solid modeling. IEEE
Computer Graphics and its Applications 1993;13:53–9.
[25] Shene CK. Blending two cones with Dupin cyclides. Computer Aided Geometric
Design 1998;15(7):643–73.
[26] Pottmann H, Peternell M. Applications of Laguerre geometry in CAGD.
Computer Aided Geometric Design 1998;15:165–86.
[27] Krasauskas R. Branching blend of natural quadrics based on surfaces with
rational offsets. Computer Aided Geometric Design 2008;25(4–5):332–41.
[28] Siddiqi K, Pizer SM. Medial representations: mathematics, algorithms and
applications. 1st edition Springer Publishing Company Incorporated; 2008.
[29] Peternell M, Pottmann H. A Laguerre geometric approach to rational offsets.
Computer Aided Geometric Design 1998;15:223–49.
[30] Peternell M, Pottmann H. Computing rational parametrizations of canal
surfaces. Journal of Symbolic Computation 1997;23(February):255–66.
[31] Landsmann G, Schicho J, Winkler F. The parametrization of canal surfaces
and the decomposition of polynomials into a sum of two squares. Journal of
Symbolic Computation 2001;32(1–2):119–32.
[32] Kosinka J, Jüttler B. MOS surfaces: medial surface transforms with rational
domain boundaries. In: The mathematics of surfaces XII. Lecture notes in
computer science, vol. 4647. Springer; 2007. p. 245–62.
[33] Peternell M, Odehnal B, Sampoli ML. On quadratic two-parameter families
of spheres and their envelopes. Computer Aided Geometric Design 2008;25:
342–55.
[34] Peternell M, Odehnal B. On generalized LN-surfaces in 4-space. In: Proceedings
of ‘ISSAC08’. 2008. p. 223–30.
[35] Peternell M. Rational two-parameter families of spheres and rational offset
surfaces. Journal of Symbolic Computation 2010;45(1):1–18.
[36] Bastl B, Jüttler B, Kosinka J, Lávička M. Volumes with piecewise quadratic
medial surface transforms: computation of boundaries and trimmed offsets.
Computer-Aided Design 2010;42(6):571–9.
[37] Hoffmann CM, Vermeer PJ. Validity determination for MAT surface representation. In: Proceedings of the 6th IMA conference on the mathematics of surfaces.
New York (NY, USA): Clarendon Press; 1996. p. 249–65.
[38] Teixeira RC. Medial axes and mean curvature motion I: regular points. Journal
of Visual Communication and Image Representation 2002;13(1–2):135–55.
[39] Yushkevich P, Fletcher PT, Joshi S, Thall A, Pizer SM. Continuous medial
representations for geometric object modeling in 2D and 3D. Image and Vision
Computing 2003;21(1):17–27.

