Computer Networks 75 (2014) 297–312

Contents lists available at ScienceDirect

Computer Networks
journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/comnet

Cooperative proxies: Optimally trading energy and quality
of service in mobile devices
Aruna Prem Bianzino, Mikael Asplund, Ekhiotz Jon Vergara, Simin Nadjm-Tehrani ⇑
Department of Computer and Information Science, Linköping University, 581 83 Linköping, Sweden

a r t i c l e

i n f o

Article history:
Received 6 November 2013
Received in revised form 19 June 2014
Accepted 8 October 2014
Available online 17 October 2014
Keywords:
Green networks
Mobile
Energy efﬁciency
User terminals
Wireless communication energy
Bandwidth sharing

a b s t r a c t
This work studies the energy and quality of service (QoS) trade-off in the context of mobile
devices with two communication interfaces (a high energy and a low energy interface). We
propose an optimisation scheme during underload scenarios where proxy groups are
dynamically formed exploiting both interfaces. The scheme integrates a reward mechanism that compensates a proxy while carrying other group members’ trafﬁc, and deals with
churn (joining and leaving of nodes) in a cell area. For trafﬁc ﬂows that approximate
knowledge about current services we show that the scheme can achieve energy savings
of 60% for all mobile nodes as whole. We also demonstrate the impact on disruption-sensitive ﬂows as a function of the trafﬁc mix, and that the use of rewards for selection of proxies is a fair mechanism in the long term.
Ó 2014 The Authors. Published by Elsevier B.V. This is an open access article under the CC
BY-NC-ND license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/3.0/).

1. Introduction
Networking is intertwined with the fabric of social and
professional activities and reliance on mobile communication infrastructures, such as 3rd generation cellular communication (3G), WiFi access points, and future generations of
these technologies seems indispensable. Seamless mobility
is supported by the cellular infrastructures, which have traditionally been designed with load maximisation and high
availability in focus. Ubiquity of smart devices (phones,
pads, phablets) has made the above quality of service
(QoS) requirements more vivid. The call for sustainable
information and communication technology (ICT) has, however, added another dimension to the equation, namely the
need for optimising energy consumption.
Several major works focus on reducing the energy footprint of the infrastructure nodes (e.g., [1–3]), which by

⇑ Corresponding author.
E-mail addresses: aruna.bianzino@liu.se (A.P. Bianzino), mikael.
asplund@liu.se (M. Asplund), ekhiotz.vergara@liu.se (E.J. Vergara), simin.
nadjm-tehrani@liu.se (S. Nadjm-Tehrani).

some estimates constituted 90% of the total communication energy a few years ago [4]. However, with 50 billion
devices stipulated to be connected all the time [5], the
device energy becomes an important part of the overall
energy optimisation. Although device energy use may be
small for each unit, with a system perspective, it makes a
considerable sum in total.
On top of this contributing factor to the ICT carbon footprint we have an Internet user service availability aspect
meaning that the length of uninterrupted use of a device
should be maximised for a given user. This essentially
amounts to optimising the use of battery resources. From
a communication perspective the saving can be achieved
in the device within different layers: hardware and ﬁrmware (interface card, battery technology), but also software
residing in transport and application/session layer (app
development, ﬂow management). While vendors will
continuously reduce the hardware footprint they cannot
optimise energy at packet/ﬂow level since the device is
application agnostic. This paper focuses on the communication energy optimisation at the device level. Other energy
saving measures managed within the infrastructure

http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.comnet.2014.10.013
1389-1286/Ó 2014 The Authors. Published by Elsevier B.V.
This is an open access article under the CC BY-NC-ND license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/3.0/).

298

A.P. Bianzino et al. / Computer Networks 75 (2014) 297–312

(e.g., a base station) are complementary to the approach
we propose.
We start by asking the question: under which circumstances can energy be reduced with no major impact on
service? The paper starts from the premise that energy
savings are possible during intervals of time that a (sub)
network is underloaded. In general, usage scenarios consist
of periods of underload followed by periods of overload,
each demanding their own optimisation regime (one may
focus on energy whereas the other typically prioritises
throughput). Focusing on periods during which energy
savings are possible allows a smart combination of the best
of two worlds. A system continues to reap the beneﬁts of
accessibility of a high energy access node (AN) within a cell
during overloads. However, during underloads, we form
multi-user coalitions in that cell using a low energy interface in order to reduce the overall energy in these
intervals.1
Our approach includes dynamic formation of proxy
groups whereby one node acts as a proxy which is connected to the high energy interface, and relays the trafﬁc
received from/sent to members in the proxy group using
a low energy interface. In order to compensate the current
proxy for the additional energy used to transmit other
nodes’ packets, we create a reward-based sharing scheme
in which the proxy role rotates in the group. This guarantees some notion of fairness among the nodes in the proxy
groups in the long term.
During overloads the bandwidth of an existing proxy
group towards the AN will not sufﬁce, requiring reconﬁguration of the proxy group formations. This paper addresses
the problem of periodic (re)formation of proxy groups such
that the overall energy consumed due to data communication is optimised. The local switches within a cell, merging
proxy groups when they are underloaded and splitting into
more proxy groups when one is overloaded, are automatically dealt with as part of the optimisation algorithm. Note
that the degenerate case becomes where all the nodes are
their own proxy and carry (only) their own trafﬁc at the
high energy interface.
Since variations in load are unpredictable one needs to
perform these self-organisations based on the knowledge
of the current trafﬁc characteristics. Our system treats
those ﬂows that are disruption sensitive different from
those that have a more relaxed QoS requirement.
The main challenges that need to be addressed are
churn (new nodes coming into the cell or leaving the cell),
fairness (the node acting as a proxy and thereby spending
additional energy is fairly selected over a long time span),
and maintained quality of service (coalition switches
should preferably not disrupt ﬂows that are sensitive to
reconﬁguration).
If we compare the classic schemes typically deployed to
cope with these issues within networking layers, rotation

1
Note that we intentionally use the term access node to be technology
agnostic. This is a node that is connected to the existing infrastructure and
which has a relatively high energy consumption for transmissions, compared to other technologies in the scenario. For example, this is a 3G base
station in the model used for evaluations in Section 4, and not a WiFi access
point.

can be considered as a choice of the forwarding node (at
IP/routing layer), while proxy group merge/split can be
considered as a means of admission control for maintaining proxy load, or congestion control (at transport layer).
Addition of churn to the problem upsets both of these
schemes.
First, a fair rotation scheme may not work if the
addition of nodes is faster than the rate of feasible rotation.
Second, the overhead of frequent reconﬁguring (merges
and splits) will wipe out the beneﬁts of making coalitions
in the ﬁrst place. Our ﬁrst attempt at resolving these issues
is to characterise a system model under which optimisation can indeed be formulated. This scheme makes attainability of energy savings (at an acceptable level of QoS
disruptions) the deciding factor. That is, reconﬁgurations
will only be made if overall energy savings are possible.
The contributions of the paper are as follows:
 An optimisation scheme for dynamically forming proxy
groups, that combines a high energy interface used by
proxies and low energy interfaces used by proxy group
members.
 An integrated rotation scheme, based on accrued
rewards and their expenditure, so that the proxy role
is shared in a fair manner in a dynamic load scenario.
 A scheme for reconﬁguring proxy groups upon load
changes that acts as an implicit admission control for
the proxy using the high energy interface. Both reconﬁguring and rotation (under items 1 and 2 above) take
account of disruption sensitivity of ﬂows, thereby
minimising disruption to ﬂows that are conﬁgurationsensitive.
In general, the contribution of devices to the energy
consumption dynamically changes based on (a) user connections to Internet services – creating non-deterministic
ﬂow dynamics, and (b) embedded devices which do not
send predetermined packet ﬂows in a time-driven fashion
– considered in machine-to-machine or Internet-of-Things
scenarios – creating trafﬁc that is event-based and
dynamic.
In our trafﬁc model we characterise 4 ﬂow classes
covering the current services used by mobile users, and
simulate a network that implements the optimisation
scheme within a cell. The trafﬁc ﬂows cover applications
with soft or hard real-time constraints, or no timing
constraints.
Our evaluations (based on 3G and WiFi energy models)
show an energy saving of over 60% for all the nodes in the
system on average. We then go on to study the usefulness
of the reward mechanism as a means of implementing a
fairness criteria, and ﬁnd it to be as intended within a
28 day envelope of operation (i.e., level of unfairness tends
to reduce over time). Next we characterise the degree of
disturbance to QoS levels offered in a wide range of trafﬁc
mixes ﬁnding the mixes of trafﬁc for which our scheme
makes a valuable trade-off between energy and QoS during
underloads.
The structure of the paper is as follows. Section 2 documents the assumptions in our optimisation scheme for the
overall energy vs. QoS trade-off. Section 3 describes the

299

A.P. Bianzino et al. / Computer Networks 75 (2014) 297–312

optimisation scheme combined with the rotation mechanism. Section 4 is devoted to experimental evaluation of
the proposed techniques in a simulated environment and
Section 5 discusses potential deployment issues. Related
works are presented in Section 6, and Section 7 sums up
the conclusions as well as some future directions for work.

approach adapts to the changing environment by periodically reconﬁguring every T step seconds. This means that
the reconﬁguration interval should be signiﬁcantly smaller
than the average time a node stays in the system.

2. System model

To put this in context, in our evaluations we use 1 min as the
value for T step whereas Trestian et al. [6] based on a data set
of over 280,000 users report that the average time a node
stays with one base station in a 3G context is 40 min.

Our system model is composed of a set N of mobile
devices with multiple wireless communication interfaces.
These devices are able to use local low energy interfaces
to communicate with nearby nodes, as well as the high
energy interface to communicate via an access node (AN)
which provides Internet connectivity. A proxy group is
deﬁned as a group of mobile devices where one of them
acts as a proxy for the others. By forming optimal
energy-saving proxy groups, the mobile devices are able
to reduce their overall communication energy consumption over time.
Our optimisation framework acts on the level of a single
AN cell (i.e., where communication is managed by the
same AN). The overall scheme can be replicated across an
entire infrastructure network, but for the sake of clarity
we focus on a single cell in our mathematical model as well
as in the evaluation. The optimisation logic and the rotation scheme reside at the AN, which has knowledge of
the participating nodes and their current trafﬁc demand.
Hence, at a cell level the optimisation is centralised, but
the trafﬁc aggregation is dynamic and decentralised. In
the remainder of this section we describe the basic
assumptions which underpin this work in terms of mobility, proxy capability and trafﬁc model.
2.1. Node mobility
Let At # N denote the dynamic but ﬁnite set of mobile
nodes that are active in the cell at time t. Nodes can enter
and leave the cell at any point in time as illustrated in
Fig. 1. A node which leaves the cell also has to leave its
energy-saving proxy group. This means that the ability of
the system to adapt to changes must match the mobilityinduced churn (rate of change for At ).
Let l represent the average rate at which nodes depart
from the cell (i.e., the average time a node spends in the
cell is 1=l). We assume that this average departure rate
is bounded and not excessively high. Our proposed

T step (

1

ð1Þ

l

2.2. Proxy capability
The energy-saving scheme investigated in this paper
assumes that every node which participates in the scheme
is capable of acting as a proxy for other nearby nodes. Fig. 2
shows the general idea where the proxy nodes route data
to and from other nodes in the same cell.
For the purpose of formalisation and evaluation we
assume that all nodes within a single cell are able to
communicate with each other using the low energy wireless interface. Variations where only some nodes have
proxy-capability or shorter-range low-power interfaces
can be envisaged. However, we will not use node-to-node
communications other than the case where one node in
such a pair is a proxy. We are interested in the basic proxy
group mechanism and how to optimally form fair and
energy-efﬁcient groups. Such principal results are necessary in order to subsequently create derivative schemes
to deal with implementation-related problems.
We use the Boolean function pði; jÞ : At Â At ! f0; 1g to
denote whether j is the proxy for device i (in the ﬁgure
pð4; 3Þ ¼ 1 whereas pð4; 2Þ ¼ 0). Every node must be associated with a proxy, and every proxy node must also be its
own proxy (e.g., pð3; 3Þ ¼ 1; pð7; 7Þ ¼ 1 and pð10; 10Þ ¼ 1 in
Fig. 2). A trivial proxy is a node that is only its own proxy,
e.g., device 1 in Fig. 2 (pð1; 1Þ ¼ 1).
Since our focus is on developing a general optimization
framework, we only consider high and low energy interfaces in the system model. This high-level abstraction is
motivated by the fact that the actual power consumption
is technology-dependent (and therefore differs between
Low energy link
High energy link
Proxy node
1

Cell

Non-proxy node
3
13
12

2
4
10

AN
5
7

11

8
9

6
Fig. 1. Node mobility relative to a single cell.

Fig. 2. Example conﬁguration of the system with four proxy groups.

300

A.P. Bianzino et al. / Computer Networks 75 (2014) 297–312

different device models). For the purpose of conﬁguring
proxy groups it sufﬁces to assume that a node will consume less energy using the low-energy interface. Thus,
the power models are only necessary for evaluation purposes (described in Section 4.1).
Finally, for the proxy scheme to work, the time required
to establish a new proxy conﬁguration needs to be signiﬁcantly smaller than the time between reconﬁgurations
(T step ).
2.3. Trafﬁc model
Our proposed approach is concerned with data trafﬁc
which we model as bidirectional ﬂows. Each ﬂow is associated with a source node (the mobile device), a data rate,
and an expected duration. To reduce model complexity
we treat all trafﬁc to and from one device as a single ﬂow
(the modelled data rate is the sum of all the uplink and
downlink trafﬁc), which means that a node i has at most
one ﬂow lðiÞ representing the load for that node in the
model. All the generated and received trafﬁc of the mobile
devices goes through the AN.
To account for variations on QoS requirements among
different ﬂows we consider ﬂows with some real-time constraints as sensitive which means that it is undesirable to
interrupt these ﬂows even for a short duration (the change
of a proxy device is considered as an interruption in a
ﬂow). Examples of this kind of ﬂows may be live video
streaming and gaming applications. We use the Boolean
function sðiÞ : At ! f0; 1g to denote whether a node is
transmitting or receiving a sensitive ﬂow at time t. The fact
that a node is participating in a sensitive ﬂow needs to be
known by the AN.
The nodes within a proxy group share the bandwidth B
provided by the high-energy interface of the proxy node.
We assume lðiÞ 6 B, considering that a node will not generate more trafﬁc than B when using the low-energy interface. A sudden increase in trafﬁc load will affect the
ability of the proxy groups to meet the demand forcing
the system to reconﬁgure. Similarly, a reduction in load
will lead to under-utilisation which leads to energy waste.
However, when a single node experiences sudden changes
in load, by aggregating the load in a proxy group, the
impact of these changes is reduced. Given that a per-node
load estimate lðiÞ is maintained for node i during a forecast
window T for , the system will be able to adapt to changes in
trafﬁc load as long as the reconﬁguration interval is not
longer than the forecast window: T step 6 T for .
3. Algorithm design
This section presents POEM (Proxy for Optimal Energy
saving in Mobile devices), an algorithm which periodically
determines a fair, energy and QoS-optimal proxy group conﬁguration. The input to the algorithm is the set of nodes At
which are active within a cell at time t, the characteristics
of the activity they are performing in terms of load lðiÞ and
sensitivity sðiÞ, and the previous proxy group conﬁguration
pprev ði; jÞ. The output is a new optimal and fair proxy conﬁguration pÃ ði; jÞ. The algorithm is composed of three steps:

1. Determine an optimal set of proxy groups which minimise ﬂow disruptions and overall energy consumption.
2. Calculate node rewards to reﬂect how much time each
node has spent acting as a proxy for other nodes.
3. Determine a new proxy device for each group using the
reward-based fairness scheme.
Finally, since the set of mobile nodes At is not static, the
system also needs to handle aperiodic events where nodes
arrive and depart from the cell between two reconﬁguration points. We now proceed to present the three algorithm steps as well as the mechanism to deal with
aperiodic events.
3.1. Optimisation
Step 1 is clearly the core part of this algorithm since it
determines the optimal proxy group conﬁguration for the
next time period. Our optimisation approach is based on
two main design principles. The ﬁrst principle is to prioritise the minimisation of ﬂow disruptions over energy
savings. The second principle is the general nature of the
algorithm, meaning that it can apply to any kind of devices
that present a low and a high-energy interface, without
requiring perfect knowledge of the energy characteristics
of every single device. As a consequence, the optimal
conﬁguration is one with as few high-energy interfaces
as possible, i.e., as few and large groups as possible.
In order to perform the proxy group optimisation step,
it is necessary to have information about the current trafﬁc
ﬂows of the mobile devices. For each node i 2 At the load
estimate lðiÞ and sensitivity sðiÞ of the ﬂow originating at
node i is an input to optimisation. Recall from Section 2.3,
that we assume the ﬂow estimation to be approximately
valid for a forecast window of T for which should be greater
than the time to the next reconﬁguration T step . Note that
the system is able to operate also with unreliable predictions (in the evaluation in Section 4 we do not assume
the load to stay constant between reconﬁguration steps).
The purpose of the optimisation step is to ﬁnd the set of
proxy groups which ﬁrst of all minimises the amount of
proxy switches for nodes with sensitive ﬂows and as a secondary objective minimises the global energy consumption. The outcome of the optimisation step is an optimal
but tentative proxy conﬁguration popt ði; jÞ. The ﬁnal choice
of proxy within a proxy group can potentially be changed
in the subsequent steps of the algorithm to account for
the fairness requirement. However, this proxy rotation
does not affect the optimality with regards to energy consumption and non-disruption of sensitive ﬂows. The same
number of proxies are maintained and the same sensitive
ﬂows are respected.
We formulate the optimisation problem as an Integer
Linear Programming (ILP) problem with the following
objective function:

Obj : min

X
i2At

sðiÞvðiÞ þ

1
pði; iÞ
Mt


ð2Þ

where vðiÞ : At ! f0; 1g is a function taking the value of 1
if the proxy of device i will change with respect to the

A.P. Bianzino et al. / Computer Networks 75 (2014) 297–312
Table 1
Optimisation variables and parameters.
Attribute

Domain

Codomain

Description

lðiÞ

At

R0

sðiÞ

At

f0; 1g

pprev ði; jÞ

At Â At

f0; 1g

Mt

n.a.

N

B

n.a.

R0

vðiÞ

At

f0; 1g

pði; jÞ

At Â At

f0; 1g

Load estimate of device i 2 At
(input parameter)
1 if the ﬂow at node i 2 At is
sensitive to change of proxy (input
parameter)
1 if device j 2 At was the proxy of
device i 2 At in the previous
conﬁguration (input parameter)
Constant to prioritise sensitive
ﬂows, Mt > jAt j (input parameter)
Bandwidth of the high-energy
interface (input parameter)
1 if the proxy will change for
device i 2 At with respect to the
current optimal conﬁguration
(optimisation variable)
1 if device j 2 At is the proxy of
device i 2 At in the current
conﬁguration (optimisation
variable)

previous proxy conﬁguration (i.e., this term minimises the
sensitive ﬂow disruptions).
The second term of Eq. (2) minimises the number of
proxy groups (same as the number of devices which are
proxy of themselves, pði; iÞ), corresponding to a minimum
system energy consumption. This term is weighted with
a factor 1=M t to guarantee that the ﬁrst term is always prioritised and reﬂect the strict preference towards solutions
with fewer proxy switches for devices with sensitive ﬂows,
over solutions resulting in lower energy consumption but
disrupting ﬂows. The maximum value that the second term
can assume is jAt j for the degenerate case, while the smallest variation of the ﬁrst factor is 1 unit. In order to strict
prioritise ﬂow conservation over energy saving, M t should
hence be bigger than jAt j. Since any choice of M t > jAt j is
equivalent here, but a higher value of Mt slows down the
exploration of the solution space, M t ¼ jAt j þ 1 represents
the best possible choice.
The objective function is subject to the following constraints: (see Table 1)

X
pði; jÞ ¼ 1 8i 2 At

ð3Þ

j2At

X
pðj; iÞlðjÞ 6 B 8i 2 At

ð5Þ

i2A

Xt
jpði; jÞ À pprev ði; jÞj ¼ 2vðiÞ 8i 2 At

assumes the correct value, i.e., vðiÞ ¼ 1 if device i will
change its proxy node, vðiÞ ¼ 0 otherwise.
By solving this optimisation problem we obtain a
QoS-energy-optimal proxy group conﬁguration popt ði; jÞ.
However, the optimal solution is not necessarily unique.
Within each proxy group, there are several nodes which
could potentially act as proxy. We now continue to describe
the ﬁnal steps of the algorithm which is concerned with a
fair proxy selection scheme.
3.2. Device reward
The nodes which act as proxies suffer temporarily from
an increased energy consumption due to relaying other
nodes’ data on their high-energy interface. To alleviate this
problem we use a reward mechanism to ensure long-term
fairness in the cooperation. This mechanism keeps track of
the time each device spends acting as proxy for other
nodes. Each device i is associated to a reward value rðiÞ
which is a cumulative variable (with an abstract value
domain on which increment and decrement are deﬁned),
updated in the following way:
 For each time unit spent by a device as proxy of other
nodes, its reward value is increased by one unit;
 For each time unit spent by a device using another node
as proxy, its reward value is decreased by 1=ðG À 1Þ,
where G is the size of the proxy group which the node
belongs to.
Within each proxy group this reward policy always
sums to zero, so the global reward will tend to stay constant over time. Consider a proxy group of size G, which
by deﬁnition has 1 proxy node and ðG À 1Þ non-proxy
nodes. The sum of the reward in the group will be
1 À ðG À 1Þ Á 1=ðG À 1Þ ¼ 1 À 1 ¼ 0. This holds true also for
singular proxy groups where devices act as proxy for themselves and for no other nodes (i.e., not participating in a
larger proxy group results in zero reward).
This reward scheme is strictly based on how long time
nodes spend as proxies and non-proxies. Other factors such
as bandwidth usage or energy cost can be envisaged. However, the energy-cost is not proportional to bandwidth
usage and requires complex technology-dependent models
to be accurately represented [7].

ð4Þ

j2At

X
pði; jÞ 6 jAt j Á pðj; jÞ 8j 2 At

301

ð6Þ

j2At

where Eq. (3) ensures that each device is associated to
exactly one proxy. Eq. (4) checks that the total trafﬁc of
each proxy group remains within the bandwidth capacity
of the high-energy interface of the proxy (i.e., B). Eq. (5)
ensures that if a node is acting as proxy for other nodes,
then it is acting as proxy also for itself. This is due to the
fact that the maximum value that the left side can assume
is jAt j. Finally, Eq. (6) guarantees that the variable vðiÞ

3.3. Proxy rotation scheme
The deﬁned reward function allows the design of a fair
rotation scheme for the role of proxy among devices in a
proxy group. The designed rotation scheme starts from
the proxy conﬁguration obtained through the optimisation
step leading to popt ði; jÞ and works as follows: (i) Every time
a reconﬁguration is considered, for each proxy group, a
check is performed to guarantee that no proxy rotation is
applied if some devices in the group have sensitive ﬂows.
(ii) If there are no devices with sensitive ﬂows, the device
with the lowest value of rðiÞ inside the group is selected
as proxy. The choice is driven by the higher priority we
set for not affecting sensitive activities, over reducing the

302

A.P. Bianzino et al. / Computer Networks 75 (2014) 297–312

energy consumption. At the same time, the designed
reward scheme guarantees a fair rotation in the long term.
When all proxy groups have been considered for a possible non-disruptive proxy switch, the resulting fair and
optimal proxy conﬁguration pÃ ði; jÞ can be applied by the
mobile devices in the system.2
Note that our current model is agnostic to the current
energy level in a device. In an implementation it would
be possible to adopt a scheme whereby the nodes that
are connected to a power source are prioritised when
choosing a proxy (though not interesting in evaluations
here since our focus is on saving battery charge in mobile
scenarios). It would also be possible to use the reading of
the current charge level as an input to the selection of
the proxy. However, it is worth pointing out that (a) to
evaluate that scheme our evaluation here would have to
include a generic discharge model for all devices (which
is not easy to establish), and (b) the highest-charge node
prioritisation would be similar to works that use energy
harvesting (in essence opposing the current fairness we
achieve in our scheme).
3.4. Aperiodic events
Apart from the periodic reconﬁguration, special care is
needed to handle the cases of devices arriving or leaving
the cell. In particular, when a device arrives in the cell, it
forms its own group (for which it is the proxy), and will be
normally considered in the system optimisation to join
another proxy group at the end of the current T step time window. When a device is leaving the cell, two cases are possible: (i) the device is not the proxy of its proxy group, or (ii)
the device is the proxy of its proxy group. In the ﬁrst case,
the device can leave the proxy group without problems
and the rest of the conﬁguration is kept until the end of
the current T step time window. In the second case, the other
devices in the proxy group remain in the same proxy group
and a new proxy is selected among them following the rules
listed in Section 3.3 (i.e., the device with the lowest reward
rðiÞ will be selected as proxy). Note that in case (ii) some sensitive ﬂows may inevitably be disrupted. However, this will
not be due to optimisation-induced changes in the group
but rather due to a node physically leaving a cell (the effect
of which can be viewed as similar to cellular handover). We
will return to this issue in Section 4.2.
4. Evaluation
We evaluate the POEM algorithm in terms of energy
savings, degree of QoS assurance and fairness. This section
describes the evaluation methodology and settings, and
presents the results.
4.1. Evaluation methodology
In order to evaluate the algorithm performance under
the speciﬁed system model, we deﬁne realistic mobility,
2
Note that pÃ ði; jÞ is an optimal solution equivalent to popt ði; jÞ, as it fulﬁls
the same set of constraints and has the same values for sðiÞvðiÞ and the
same number of proxy groups, i.e., nodes i for which pði; iÞ ¼ 1.

trafﬁc and energy consumption models. These are plugged
into our modular simulation environment. The models are
described below.
4.1.1. Mobility model
The proposed algorithm has been evaluated considering
a system composed of a single AN cell and a population of
devices entering and leaving the system. We consider
devices entering the cell following a Poisson process with
arrival rate k ¼ 25 Â 10À3 Hz, and leaving the system after
an exponentially distributed time period with mean
1=l ¼ 900 s. The selected mean period that a device stays
in the cell is lower than the mean values reported in the
literature (40 min in a 3G context [6]), which is chosen to
further stress the system in terms of disruptions.
4.1.2. Trafﬁc model
Modelling trafﬁc ﬂows in terms of duration and bandwidth utilisation in a realistic manner is a difﬁcult task
as historical trafﬁc models and characterisations quickly
become outdated with the fast evolution of devices. For
example, the rapid increase of mobile applications is
replacing some of the trafﬁc previously associated with
‘‘browsing’’, thereby changing the trafﬁc characteristics.
We deﬁne ﬁve distinct groupings of user/application
activities on mobile devices leading to ﬁve trafﬁc classes.
The ﬁrst classiﬁcation groups activities leading to trafﬁc
ﬂows which are delay-sensitive, like VoIP, live radio, etc.
The second grouping models the off-screen communication,
including background trafﬁc, notiﬁcations, cloud synchronisation, software updates, etc. This class of ﬂows has no
time-constrained characteristics. The third activity type
captures interactive delay-tolerant trafﬁc sources, like web
browsing, instant messaging, applications like Facebook
or weather forecast, delay-tolerant games, etc. This class
has some application-dependent latency requirements
but the nature of the requirements is such that a (short
enough) disruption in the ﬂow does not signiﬁcantly
reduce the service quality. The fourth class covers the
delay-constrained communications. This class describes
activities which can tolerate delay up to a point, due to a
given buffer policy (e.g., Youtube or Spotify) or to speciﬁc
timing limitations (e.g., purchasing activities or some
games) but the applications are by nature delay-sensitive
beyond the toleration point. Finally, the ﬁfth activity type
models the periods of inactivity of the device denoted by
the silent class.
We model each activity in terms of duration, data rate,
and the proportion of time a node will spend with this
activity on average. The details are reported in Table 2,
where ‘‘Prop.’’ indicates the average proportion of time
spent by each device performing the different activities,
‘‘Duration’’ indicates the minimum and maximum duration of the activity, ‘‘Data rate’’ indicates the minimum
and maximum data rates, and ‘‘Flow sens.’’ indicates
whether the trafﬁc ﬂow is sensitive to changes of the proxy
(1 denoting sensitivity). For each activity a data rate value
is selected at random as uniformly distributed between
minimum and maximum of the indicated interval. Also
a duration value is selected at random as uniformly

A.P. Bianzino et al. / Computer Networks 75 (2014) 297–312
Table 2
User application activities and resulting ﬂows.
Activity description

Prop.
(%)

Duration
(s)

Data rate
(kbps)

Flow
sens.

Delay-sensitive
Off-screen communication
Delay-tolerant interactive
Delay-constrained
interactive
Silent

5
25
20
10

30–600
3–20
60–3600
60–3600

1
0
0
1

40

1–900

30–100
1–500
50–2000
500–
2000
–

–

distributed between minimum and maximum of the indicated interval.
Data rate and duration values of the different activities
have been selected in order to be representative of all the
possible categories included in the groups. As an example,
the interactive delay-tolerant group includes activities
such as instant messaging or web browsing, which can
be characterised by durations as short as one minute, up
to durations as long as one hour. At the same time, these
activities can result in bandwidth request as low as
50 kbps (e.g., consulting a web page low in media contents)
or as high as 2 Mbps (e.g., consulting a web page including
videos). Note that bandwidth requests are average values
over the activity duration. Instantaneous values can hence
include lower minima and higher maxima.
The proportion of time spent by devices performing the
different activities has been selected in order to represent
the typical behaviour of a user in a non-ofﬁce, non-home
environment. Such behaviour is usually dominated by
non-interactive activities (i.e., silent and off-screen), while
we consider a mix of the interactive activities mainly
including delay-tolerant activities (e.g., delay-tolerant
games or Facebook) and a smaller portion of delay-sensitive activities (e.g., live radio or VoIP).
4.1.3. Energy model
Even though the optimization framework is general and
does not rely on technology-dependent energy models, we
still need to compute the energy savings of our approach.
Two widespread wireless interfaces are selected for the
evaluation: 3G as the high-energy interface, and WiFi as
the low-energy interface. We use a basic energy model in
the evaluation to compute the communication energy
based on the data rate of the ﬂows resulting from the user
activities. A ﬂow represents both the transmitted and the
received data.
The communication energy depends on various aspects,
such as network inactivity timers, power saving modes or
digital modulation schemes [8]. Power consumption per
bit decreases when the data rate increases [9], and the
energy consumption is not proportional to the amount of
data sent [10]. The current state-of-the-art energy models
proﬁle the transmission energy at packet level [11–13],
which does not satisfy our modelling requirements which
requires a ﬂow-based energy model for the evaluation.
The ﬂow-based model is a simpliﬁcation which estimates the resulting energy consumption for a given trafﬁc
ﬂow (composed by duration and average data rate). The
model uses parameters based on measurement data [12]

303

together with earlier packet level modelling work [7].
The average power consumption for a ﬂow is modelled
as a linear function of its data rate (which for a node i is
the same as the trafﬁc load lðiÞ). Eqs. (7) and (8) show
the relationship between load and average power consumption for the high and low interfaces (3G and WiFi)
respectively. The energy consumption of the ﬂow is calculated by multiplying the average power by the ﬂow
duration.

PHi ¼ 800 þ 20 Á lðiÞ ½mW

ð7Þ

PLi ¼ 100 þ 90 Á lðiÞ ½mW

ð8Þ

Since the proxy is receiving data from all the other devices
in the proxy group, we also account for the energy cost of
its WiFi interface during receiving intervals. This model
reﬂects the energy cost of a typical WiFi software access
point running in a mobile device [14].
Finally, it is important to note that the absolute values
used in the model are not decisive since the energy savings
depend on the proportional difference between the high
and low energy interfaces. However, earlier physical
energy measurements in an implementation of a proxy
group in real devices [15], shows that the results are in
the same orders of magnitude.
4.1.4. Simulation environment
Our cooperative proxy scheme and system model have
been implemented in a custom event-based simulator
written in the Python language. This simulator schedules
and treats discrete events occurring in the system (e.g.,
device arrival/departure). Events are scheduled over continuous time. The algorithm execution event happens
every T step , while all other events are asynchronous
(according to the mobility and trafﬁc models). The simulator has been designed in a modular way so that other optimisation engines can be plugged in, as well as other trafﬁc
ﬂow, mobility and energy models.
The implementation of the POEM algorithm uses the
Gurobi optimisation engine3 to ﬁnd the optimal proxy
group conﬁgurations. The simulations have been executed
on a MacBook Pro retina (2.7 GHz Intel Core i7 processor,
16 GB of DDR3 RAM and OS X 10.8.3).
4.2. Simulation results
We compare the proposed solution against a non-cooperative scenario where each device is independently connected to the AN using its high-energy interface. The
solution was tested over an 18 h period. The simulation
parameters are summarised in Table 3. The time unit used
for calculating the reward is seconds.
Fig. 3 (Top) is reporting the variation over time of the
total trafﬁc generated by the active devices in the cell. Horizontal black dashed lines represent the capacity of a high
energy interface, so that the ﬁrst such line over the trafﬁc
curve represents a lower bound on the number of proxy
groups needed at a given time instant. Fig. 3 (Bottom)
reports the variation over time of the number of devices
3

A Gurobi Python interface is available and documented in [16].

304

A.P. Bianzino et al. / Computer Networks 75 (2014) 297–312

Table 3
Simulation parameters.
Parameter

Symbol

Value

Description

Simulation time
Reconﬁguration period
Device population
Arrival rate
Average time in the cell
Interface bandwidth

T
T step
jNj
k
1=l
B

18 h
60 s
200
25 mHz
900 s
2 Mbps

Total simulated time
Determines how often the algorithm is run
Total number of distinct devices considered
Arrival rate of devices in the cell
Average time spent by devices in the cell
Bandwidth of the high energy interface of the devices

in the considered cell, with an average between 20 and 25
devices and peaks of more than 35 devices.

ties (typically requiring a handover from one AN to
another).

4.2.1. Energy saving
Fig. 4 (Left) reports the variation over time of the total
power consumption in one run, accounting for all the
active devices in the cell, both for the non-cooperative case
and for the POEM case. As we can see, cooperative proxy
grouping considerably reduces the overall power consumption of devices. To better quantify the average energy
saving, Fig. 4 (Right) reports the average normalised total
energy consumption for 10 different runs of the simulation, together with the corresponding standard deviation.
The 10 runs are obtained by varying the random seed,
i.e., we change the trafﬁc and mobility pattern for the different devices, while keeping the statistical values for trafﬁc proﬁles constant. The POEM algorithm leads to an
energy saving of over 60% of the total energy consumed
by the devices.

4.2.3. Fairness considerations
As an indicator for the fairness of the rotation mechanism in the proposed algorithm, we look at the distribution
of the reward among the devices in the device population.
Fig. 6 reports the evolution in time for the analysed distribution, starting from a uniform distribution – ‘‘Initial’’ in
Fig. 6. The x-axis reports the bottom reward value of each
one-hour bin of the distribution, while the y-axis reports
the percentage of devices in each bin. As we can see, the
algorithm tends to reduce the variation of reward values
by forcing the devices with low reward to act as proxy
and avoiding devices with high reward to act as proxy. A
measure of the change of the reward distribution is given
by the standard deviation of the devices’ reward, reported
as ‘‘std’’ in the graphs in Fig. 6. The standard deviation steadily decreases over time indicating that the reward values
progressively concentrate around the average value.

4.2.2. QoS considerations
Saving energy with no concern for QoS is easy. An inﬁnite delay of a service trivially saves a lot of energy. This
section presents our balanced approach to QoS treatment.
As an indicator of the QoS for the proposed solution we
look at the number of times in which a device’s proxy is
changed while it is performing a sensitive activity. This
can happen in two cases: (i) the proxy leaves the cell
(‘‘Proxy Mobility’’), or (ii) the total trafﬁc of the proxy
group increases and the proxy is no longer able to carry
it with the previous conﬁguration, thus a group split has
to take place (‘‘Reconﬁguration’’). In the latter case, the
algorithm naturally prefers new conﬁgurations in which
devices performing non-sensitive activities are relocated
to another proxy group, but this is not always possible.
The left bar of Fig. 5 reports the total number devices facing a proxy change while performing a sensitive activity,
considering all devices and over the entire simulation period in the run depicted in Fig. 5 (Left).
In order to better understand how this metric compares
to other mobility-related events we contrast it to the
occurrences of devices leaving the cell while performing
a sensitive activity (‘‘DeviceMobility’’, right bar of Fig. 5).
This phenomenon is not affected by the algorithm and happens due to the mobility of devices themselves. We thus
observe that the proxy changes for sensitive activities
introduced by the algorithm are mainly due to device
mobility, and similar in number to the occurrences of
devices leaving the cell while performing sensitive activi-

4.2.4. Trafﬁc mix variations
The presence of sensitive ﬂows in the system limits the
ability to make arbitrary changes to the proxy group conﬁgurations. Therefore, it is interesting to evaluate how
the trade-off between energy savings and QoS is affected
by the proportion of sensitive ﬂows. For this reason, we
evaluate the algorithm with different mixes of the trafﬁc
types described in Table 2. In particular, we vary the sum
of the sensitive activities (i.e., ‘‘Delay-sensitive’’ and
‘‘Delay-constrained’’) from 0% to 100%, while maintaining
their internal proportion, as well as maintaining proportion among the non-sensitive activities.
The corresponding variation in terms of energy saving
and proxy changes for sensitive ﬂows is reported in
Fig. 7. We can observe that the energy saving accomplished
by POEM is slightly decreasing for increasing amounts of
sensitive ﬂows until they form around 50% of the total trafﬁc. For higher amounts of sensitive ﬂows in the trafﬁc mix,
the energy saving decreases faster down to no savings for
100% of sensitive ﬂows. This behaviour is due to the
decreasing freedom in grouping devices with increasing
constraints due to sensitive ﬂows.
The number of proxy changes (shown as bars in Fig. 7)
for sensitive activities is increasing for growing amounts of
sensitive activities, as can be expected. The increase levels
off when there is around 80% sensitive ﬂows in the trafﬁc
mix due to the fact that only small or singular proxy groups
are formed under these circumstances.

305

A.P. Bianzino et al. / Computer Networks 75 (2014) 297–312

Total traffic [Mbps]

16
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
0

2

4

6

8

10

12

14

16

18

12

14

16

18

Time [hours]
Number of active devices

40
35
30
25
20
15
10
5
0

2

4

6

8

10

Time [hours]
Fig. 3. Total cell trafﬁc (Top) and number of active devices in the cell (Bottom).

1
Non-Cooperative
POEM

Total energy consumption

Power Consumption [W]

30
25
20
15
10
5
0

0.8
0.6
0.4
0.2
0

2

4

6

8

10

12

14

16

18

Non-Cooperative POEM

Time [hours]
Fig. 4. Total power consumption in one run (Left) and average normalised energy consumption over 10 runs (Right).

Number of devices

140

Proxy Mobility
Reconfigurations

120
100

unwarranted proxy changes, and this holds true as long
as sensitive ﬂows do not represent the majority of the trafﬁc. At the same time, our scheme can achieve considerable
energy savings even when the ﬂows are mostly sensitive.

80
60
40
20
0

POEM

DeviceMobility

Fig. 5. Proxy switch for devices performing sensitive activities, due to
proxy mobility and due to system reconﬁgurations versus number of
devices leaving the cell while performing sensitive activities.

We can hence conclude that the energy saving achieved
by our scheme is just slightly reduced by the QoS constraints which prevent sensitive ﬂows from suffering

4.2.5. Prioritisation factor
To further verify that the relative cost of upholding QoS
does not decrease the total energy savings, we consider a
variation of the original optimisation problem. Clearly,
the case where the energy is prioritised over disrupting
sensitive ﬂows is not interesting if the energy savings are
comparable, and in general both users and network operators will strictly prioritise QoS over energy saving.
Nevertheless, for completeness of the analysis, the priority between factors in the optimisation function may
be tuned by introducing a parameter a (with values
between 0 and 1) in Eq. (2). The objective function will
thus change as follows:

306

A.P. Bianzino et al. / Computer Networks 75 (2014) 297–312

Inital

7 days

60
40
20

0

10

std = 3.73 hours

80
60
40
20
0

20

100

0

10

Reward [hours]
21 days

40
20

0

10

28 days

60
40
20

10

std= 0.16 hours

80
60
40
20
0

20

50

0

10

Reward [hours]

Percentage of devices

std = 0.77 hours

80

20

Reward [hours]

28 days
Percentage of devices

Percentage of devices

60

0

20

100

0

std = 2.01 hours

80

Reward [hours]

100

0

Percentage of devices

Percentage of devices

Percentage of devices

std = 6.39 hours

80

0

14 days

100

100

40
30
20
10
0

20

12

Reward [hours]

13

Reward [hours]

Fig. 6. Evolution of the reward distribution, respectively: initial distribution (top left), distribution after one week of simulation (top centre), distribution
after two weeks of simulation (top right), distribution after three weeks of simulation (bottom left), distribution after four weeks of simulation (bottom
centre). A detailed view of the distribution after 28 days is also reported (bottom right).

80
70

1000

60
800

50
Proxy mobility
Reconfigurations
Energy saving

600

40
30

400

20
200

Energy Saving [%]

Number of proxy switches for
sensitive flows

1200

10
0

0
0

10

90

80

70

60

50

40

30

20

10

0

Sensitive activity [%]
Fig. 7. Variation of the proxy switch for sensitive ﬂows and of the energy saving for increasing amount of sensitive activities.

Obj : min

X
i2At

sðiÞvðiÞ þ


1
a pði; iÞ
Mt

ð9Þ

While keeping M t constant at M t ¼ jAt j þ 1, when a ¼ 1, Eq.
(9) is identical to the original objective function (Eq. (2)),
i.e., minimizing the number of disrupted sensitive ﬂows
is prioritised over the energy consumption. When a ¼ 0
no prioritisation is performed. We compute the average
number of disruptions and energy savings for three different values of a. The results based on 300 optimizations for
each a value are reported in Fig. 8.

This shows that the average energy savings stay nearly
constant while the disruptions are increased compared to
the original case (a ¼ 1). Thus, the optimisation with lower
values of a is inferior to the original POEM approach where
QoS is prioritised over energy savings.
5. Potentials for deployment
This section discusses some practical implementation
aspects of our proposed scheme.
Our evaluation set up exploited energy models from 3G
cellular and WiFi. Other possibilities exist and the basic

A.P. Bianzino et al. / Computer Networks 75 (2014) 297–312

307

59.15 ms. This is much smaller than the T step ¼ 60 s we
consider.4
Finally, an important issue to consider is the time taken
for each reconﬁguration. The reconﬁguration time should
be much smaller than the time for which the conﬁguration
is kept (i.e., T step ). A practical implementation of a bandwidth sharing mechanism has been described in [10],
which is using off-the-shelf technologies and results in a
reconﬁguration time of about 4 s (with no effort towards
making the implementation optimised at all). This is one
order of magnitude smaller than the T step ¼ 60 s we
consider.
Fig. 8. Average energy savings and sensitive ﬂow disruption for different
a values.

optimisation is orthogonal to those choices. Example of
potential technologies for enabling the proxy group are
WiFi-Direct [17], Bluetooth Personal Area Networks (PANs)
[18] or LTE device-to-device communication [19]. The
proxy group management overhead depends on the
selected technology (i.e., signalling bandwidth and energy,
reconﬁguration time). An implementation based on
Android phones has provided a preliminary evaluation
showing that a simple rotation (i.e., just the proxy switch
operation) in a proxy group of 2 phones uses 1.56 J of
energy due to signalling in the device which is going to
be proxy, and 0.8 J of energy due to signalling in the other
device. Thus, there are indications that the approach would
be worthwhile pursuing in practical evaluations [10].
How to elaborate the cooperation between the devices
and the AN in a practical setting is a technological aspect.
There exist technologies that allow trafﬁc routing through
a relay node, such as software access points already available in mobile devices [20]. Seamless management of the
proxy role change requires an extension to the current
technology. A possible solution may consist of a virtual
access point in each device which is remotely activated
and conﬁgured by the AN with the optimal operational
settings.
The long term accounting and management of rewards
is also an aspect that needs attention in a future deployment. The reward level of the different devices needs to
be maintained by a service provider. Per device information is already stored in the home location register database (HLR) in cellular networks. This can be extended to
include the reward information.
In cellular networks of today, per node trafﬁc measurements (which are used when allocating radio resources)
are already available at the base station by the Radio Link
Control protocol [21]. Thus, we do not envisage major
issues with tracking current classiﬁcation of sensitive/
not-sensitive trafﬁc.
Another issue worthy of attention in an optimisation
setting is the convergence time. The time to run the algorithm and compute the optimal conﬁguration should be
much smaller than the time for which the conﬁguration
is kept (i.e., T step ). In our general purpose simulation environment, the optimisation execution time has been on
average 162.24 ms, with a standard deviation of

6. Related works
In recent years energy awareness has become an substantial concern in networking, notably driven by economical, environmental and marketing factors. Considerable
amount of effort has been directed towards the reduction
of unnecessary energy consumption in ﬁxed networks.
Bianzino et al. [22] survey the main approaches in wired
networks such as on–off techniques for routing devices
and ports, adaptive-link rate or energy-aware routing. Similarly, optical networks have attracted a great deal of attention [23,24].
6.1. Energy-efﬁcient cellular networks
Mobile network operators are naturally interested in
saving energy, mostly due to the increasing operational
cost of their networks [25,26]. New proposals often adopt
infrastructure-centric approaches rather than considering
the energy consumption of user terminals [1–4,27]. A comprehensive description of the challenges on the infrastructure side of green cellular networks is provided on a survey
by Hasan et al. [28]. Several works employ optimisation
methods (e.g., integer linear programming or meta-heuristics) to reduce the energy consumption of the infrastructure in different contexts (e.g., wireless mesh networks
[29], cellular network planning [30], WLANs [31] or cellular networks [32,33]). Most approaches combine on–off
schemes for infrastructure nodes (e.g., access points) considering capacity demand and user association. The work
by Mahapatra et al. [34] proposes a general framework to
manage green communications in heterogeneous networks with different radio access technologies. These
works could act in a complementary manner to our work
where association of a proxy to an access node (as opposed
to another) would be subjected to additional optimisation
on the infrastructure side. We believe that handset energy
is also worthwhile to optimise and that works like ours are
needed as a ﬁrst step towards a holistic approach to green
communication.
The focus of our work is on reducing the communication energy consumption of multiple nodes leveraging a
second lower power interface. The readers interested in
other energy aspects than communication for single
4
The average optimisation execution time has been computed over the
1080 optimisations executed in the 18 h of simulated time.

308

A.P. Bianzino et al. / Computer Networks 75 (2014) 297–312

Table 4
Summary of the works considering cooperative techniques for mobile devices.
Ref.

Context

Approach

Technology

Evaluation method

Metric

Results

[48]

Clustering

GPRS/WiFi

Simulation (Netlogo)

Web
download

Cellular/
Bluetooth

Testbed (Nokia N70)

[45]

Content
distribution
Content
distribution
(streaming)
Content
distribution

Distribute the content via P2P
communication in the cluster
Cooperative cellular P2P streaming via
clustering

LTE/device-todevice (D2D)
3G/WiFi ad hoc
and 3G/Bluetooth

Simulation

Opportunistic cellular data ofﬂoad via
target-set selection

[18]

Clustering

[10]

Clustering

Protocol for WiFi creating Bluetooth
clusters based on heuristics
Preliminary energy studies for a node
clustering architecture

Cellular/shortrange (WiFi or
Bluetooth)
WiFi/Bluetooth

Energy
savings
Reduced
download
time
Energy
savings
Extended
system
lifetime
Energy is
not the
focus
Energy
savings
Energy
savings

56%

[43]

Game theory (iterative Prisoner’s
Dilemma)
Divide the list of Web items to
download among nodes

[49]

Cellular
overloads
Hotspot
creation

Energy
savings
Energy
savings

Up to a factor of
2.5
38–71%

Energy
savings

55–63%

[46]

[47]

[50]

[15]

Clustering

Schedulers for uplink packet forwarding
during overloads
An hotspot architecture to reduce data
via a cloud proxy and mobile
cooperative download
Physical measurements

3G/WiFi

Simulation (3G/WiFi ad
hoc), Testbed (3G/
Bluetooth)
Simulation and prototype

Simulation and testbed

LTE/WiFi

Packet-level simulation
(real trafﬁc traces and
operator settings)
Numerical

3G/WiFi

Testbed

3G/short-range
(WiFi or
Bluetooth)

Testbed (LG Nexus 4 E960)

mobile devices are referred to the survey by Vallina–
Rodriguez and Crowcroft [35].
6.2. Wireless ad hoc networks
While forming ad hoc conﬁgurations as opposed to
using an existing infrastructure is a widely studied topic
[36,37], energy consumption in idle listening mode is so
far the Achilles’ heel of ad hoc communication [38,39].
Thus, most cooperative techniques employ clustering
methods resulting in one-hop communication in a star
topology.
6.3. Energy-efﬁcient clustering
Wireless Sensor Networks (WSN) is the area in which
the energy efﬁciency within clustering has been deeply
studied. Compared to the WSN literature [40–42], mobile
nodes in a cellular network lack a common goal (in
contrast to data collection in WSN). This necessitates
mechanisms to ensure fairness and incentives to cooperate
such as our reward-scheme. Moreover, the footprint characteristics of the different interfaces and the trafﬁc load for
the individual nodes is different and unpredictable.
Cooperative techniques considering mobile devices
often employ a mix of wireless interfaces with different
energy footprint characteristics, and reduce the aggregated
energy consumption of multiple nodes. Table 4 summarises main aspects of the works categorised as cooperative
techniques, which are further described below.
Several works employ clustering assuming that the
nodes are interested in the same content. Perrucci et al.
[43] present a cooperative mobile web browsing approach
combining short-range and cellular networks. The mobile

47%

0–59%
8 times
(simulated),
27% (measured)
–

48–61%
12–68%

phones cooperatively use their unutilised cellular links to
increase the downlink data rate using the user thinking
times. The work focuses on reducing download time,
claiming that it reduces the total energy consumption as
well. Al-Kanj et al. [44] extend the previous work by analytically studying the impact of network parameters on
the energy consumption and group formation of nodes
interested in the same content. Yaacoub et al. [45] group
mobile devices in clusters using device-to-device (D2D)
communications to share content of common interest.
Chen et al. [46] propose a cooperative video streaming
system which reduces the number of cellular links and
redundant transmissions by sharing the downloaded data
via short-range interfaces. The work by Han et al. [47]
proposes to employ long and short-range interfaces to
opportunistically perform information delivery with the
goal of cellular trafﬁc ofﬂoading. The information is ﬁrst
delivered to a target set of users using the long-range interface, which is opportunistically propagated to the rest via
the short-range interface. We believe our work is the ﬁrst
instance of cooperative schemes for energy saving and
with unrelated user trafﬁc or goals.
Yoo et al. [18] present a cooperative approach to reduce
the energy consumption of WiFi creating Bluetooth clusters.
The clusters are created based on heuristics given the available bandwidth per node. Our work has a similar aspiration,
but minimises the energy consumption considering also the
impact on sensitive ﬂows. Perrucci et al. [48] introduce a
MAC layer scheme to improve the energy efﬁciency of cooperation in wireless communication. Earlier work by two of
the present authors [10] experimentally studies the energy
savings in node coalitions using real user traces. The current
work generalises the scheme to organise the proxy groups
and minimise the total energy cost as well as incorporating

A.P. Bianzino et al. / Computer Networks 75 (2014) 297–312

the QoS considerations. A short exposure to experimental
evaluation of cluster head scheduling (uplink packet forwarding) within a bi-radio (WiFi–LTE) scenario is provided
by Asadi et al. [49], which assumes fully utilised links. This
preliminary study indicates that an optimising scheme like
ours with a reward-based sharing scheme is worthwhile
to pursue in a LTE setting.
Cool-Tether [50] is a WiFi hotspot that ofﬂoads the
energy burden of the WiFi AP from mobile devices to a laptop, and uses a cloud-based server to reduce the amount of
data sent. Our work minimises the total reduction of
energy reserve of mobile nodes, including QoS and churn
considerations.
Some works [51,52] focus on improving the performance in terms of bandwidth, allowing the nodes experiencing good link quality relay the trafﬁc from the poorly
connected ones. This results in saving energy by shortening
the transmission times and improving the media access.
Although not strictly related to our optimisation framework, the following groups of works are related to the use
of several interfaces or relaying trafﬁc e.g., by software
access points:
6.4. Link selection algorithms
Several works consider the problem of selecting the
most efﬁcient interface at a certain point in time based
on energy [53–55] or QoS criteria [56–58]. These works
are orthogonal to our scheme since the link selection algorithms run in each user device, and do not consider cooperation among devices.
6.5. Energy-efﬁcient software access points
Recent mobile devices are able to set up on-the-ﬂy software access points (SoftAP) leading to clustering. Since the
AP coordinates the communication, the clients can employ
power saving mechanisms. The techniques to reduce the
cost of the AP are typically similar to the infrastructurecentric techniques. DozyAP [14] focuses on reducing the
energy consumption of WiFi tethering and shows that
the WiFi interface of a SoftAP can sleep up to 88% of the
time. Camps-Mur et al. [17] study and propose power
management protocols to reduce the energy consumption
of SoftAP using WiFi Direct. Keshav et al. [59] focus their
efforts on coordinating the power saving techniques provided by the cellular wireless communication to the ones
provided by WiFi to extend the battery life of the SoftAP.
These techniques complement our work by reducing the
energy cost of the proxy in our scheme.
6.6. Cognitive radio
Radwan et al. [60] present the main scheme of the
C2POWER project based on the intersection of cooperation,
heterogeneous networks and advanced short range communication, using the context information provided by
cognitive radios. Our work does not consider cognitive
radio, but the interested reader is directed to the available
surveys, e.g., [61,62].

309

6.7. Security and privacy
While the energy saving potential of cooperative techniques is promising, security and privacy issues are commonly the main impediments that hold back the
applicability of the techniques. So far, we have addressed
the fairness and the incentives for engaging in a cooperative scheme. In this context, Lei et al. [63] analyse the business models in the case of operator controlled peer-to-peer
communication in combination with LTE.
To sum up, compared to the other works our work proposes a novel optimal algorithm that greatly reduces the
energy consumption of user terminals while considering
the impact of sensitive ﬂows.
7. Conclusions
Techniques for energy efﬁciency range over those that
minimise the energy footprint of computations, and those
that minimise the impact of communication. With respect
to the latter, earlier approaches have focused on how one
device can maximise the use of the available channels by
elaborate channel allocation schemes and efﬁcient utilisation of bandwidth. Paradoxically, more efﬁcient channel
utilisations together with the advent of smart phones also
encourages massive data transmissions with high energy
consumption. Our work has distinguished the need to (a)
focus on energy saving potentials during intervals that systems are underloaded, and (b) act cooperatively so that the
reduced energy saving can be used for the beneﬁt of all.
Both of these are in line with the current philosophies of
participatory action.
The novelty of our work is to show that a scheme
whereby multiple radio interfaces are optimally exploited
in a proxy group creates both energy efﬁciency and accountability of the share of each device by allocation of rewards
and expenditure of them. A major aspect of our work has
been to include the QoS requirements as ﬁrst class citizens
in the optimisation criteria and to illustrate that mobility
(churn) and avoidance of ﬂow disruptions can be accommodated in the scheme. Our conclusion is that ﬂows with soft or
hard real-time requirements do not need to be disrupted
with this cooperative scheme, any more than they would
in current scenarios where churn essentially disrupts the
ﬂows if not managed by a cellular handover. We have also
shown that fairness can be achieved in sharing the individual devices’ battery resources for the beneﬁt of all, leading to
a 60% energy saving.
The proposed algorithm can be implemented in operator networks and is compatible with the signalling data
collection with respect ﬂow types and charging structures.
Furthermore, an extension of the described mechanism to
work across multiple cells is straightforward and allows
full operability across a provider network.
7.1. Future works
Extensions of the work would need to evaluate the
energy footprint of the scheme more thoroughly, although
our preliminary studies look promising [10,15]. Enriching

310

A.P. Bianzino et al. / Computer Networks 75 (2014) 297–312

the energy model by adding the impact of mobility on signal strength would be a direct extension. Extending the
current results to a network level with different cells is also
interesting.
Other directions of work would try to limit the level of
disruptions further by special schemes that differentiate
the nature of current ﬂows in more detail, e.g., by considering not only the lost ﬂow as a single ‘‘call drop’’ but in
terms of its accumulated utility over time (along the lines
of earlier work [64]).
New variations of the reward scheme would be interesting to study, including voluntarily acting as a proxy to
gain rewards, or considering other handset factors in
determining the next proxy. Comparing with fairnessoblivious schemes that resemble energy harvesting mechanisms, whereby a node with a higher current charge in
the battery (or indeed connected to a power source) would
be preferred when choosing a proxy, is an interesting exercise to pursue. Our current reward scheme which is timebased could be extended with more elaborate schemes
taking into account bandwidth usage and contribution to
the energy cost of the proxy. It remains a challenge to
design such a scheme which is both sufﬁciently general
and which would be perceived by users as fair.
Furthermore, fully distributed schemes are worthy of
detailed studies, both in terms of the comparative overhead with the current AN-based scheme, and for combining with more elaborate reward schemes, e.g., those
based on social networking.
Further studies can also theoretically consider the limits
of the energy-QoS trade-off, i.e., the conditions under
which the dynamic reconﬁguration would not manage to
save (enough) energy at an acceptable cost to QoS.
Acknowledgments
This work has been supported by the Swedish national
Graduate school in computer science (CUGS). The authors
would like to thank the anonymous reviewers for their
insightful comments that helped us to improve the paper.
References
[1] I. Humar, X. Ge, L. Xiang, M. Jo, M. Chen, J. Zhang, Rethinking energy
efﬁciency models of cellular networks with embodied energy, IEEE
Netw. 25 (2011) 40–49.
[2] J. Zhou, M. Li, L. Liu, X. She, L. Chen, Energy source aware target cell
selection and coverage optimization for power saving in cellular
networks, in: Proceedings of the 2010 IEEE/ACM International
Conference on Green Computing and Communications &
International Conference on Cyber, Physical and Social Computing,
GREENCOM-CPSCOM, 2010, pp. 1–8. http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/
GreenCom-CPSCom.2010.56.
[3] Z. Niu, Y. Wu, J. Gong, Z. Yang, Cell zooming for cost-efﬁcient green
cellular networks, IEEE Commun. Mag. 48 (2010) 74–79.
[4] M.A. Marsan, M. Meo, Energy efﬁcient wireless internet access with
cooperative cellular networks, in: Computer Networks, Elsevier, vol.
55, 2011, pp. 386–398.
[5] Ericsson, More than 50 Billion Connected Devices (white paper),
2011.
[6] I. Trestian, S. Ranjan, A. Kuzmanovic, A. Nucci, Measuring
serendipity: connecting people, locations and interests in a mobile
3g network, in: Proceedings of the 9th ACM SIGCOMM Conference
on Internet Measurement Conference, IMC, 2009, pp. 267–279.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/1644893.1644926.

[7] E.J. Vergara, S. Nadjm-Tehrani, M. Prihodko, Energybox: Disclosing the
wireless transmission energy cost for mobile devices, in: Sustainable
Computing: Informatics and Systems, Elsevier, vol. 4, 2014.
[8] N. Ding, D. Wagner, X. Chen, A. Pathak, Y.C. Hu, A. Rice,
Characterizing and modeling the impact of wireless signal strength
on smartphone battery drain, SIGMETRICS Perform. Eval. Rev. 41
(2013) 29–40.
[9] L. Wang, J. Manner, Energy consumption analysis of WLAN, 2G and
3G interfaces, in: Proceedings of the 2010 IEEE/ACM International
Conference on Green Computing and Communications &
International Conference on Cyber, Physical and Social Computing,
GREENCOM-CPSCOM, 2010, pp. 300–307. http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/
GreenCom-CPSCom.2010.81.
[10] E.J. Vergara, S. Nadjm-Tehrani, Watts2share: energy-aware trafﬁc
consolidation, in: IEEE International Conference on Green
Computing and Communications, GreenCom, 2013. http://
dx.doi.org/10.1109/GreenCom-iThings-CPSCom.2013.29.
[11] F. Qian, Z. Wang, A. Gerber, Z. Mao, S. Sen, O. Spatscheck, in: Proﬁling
Resource Usage for mobile Applications: A Cross-Layer Approach,
MobiSys, ACM, 2011, pp. 321–334, http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/
1999995.2000026.
[12] J. Huang, F. Qian, A. Gerber, Z.M. Mao, S. Sen, O. Spatscheck, A close
examination of performance and power characteristics of 4G LTE
networks, in: Proceedings of the 10th International Conference on
Mobile Systems, Applications, and Services, MobiSys, ACM, 2012, pp.
225–238, http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/2307636.2307658.
[13] A. Pathak, Y.C. Hu, M. Zhang, Where is the energy spent inside my
app?: Fine grained energy accounting on smartphones with Eprof,
in: Proceedings of the 7th ACM European Conference on Computer
Systems, EuroSys, 2012, pp. 29–42. http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/
2168836.2168841.
[14] H. Han, Y. Liu, G. Shen, Y. Zhang, Q. Li, DozyAP: power-efﬁcient Wi-Fi
tethering, in: Proceedings of the 10th International Conference on
Mobile Systems, Applications, and Services, MobiSys, ACM, 2012, pp.
421–434, http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/2307636.2307675.
[15] U. Moreno Arocena, Energy Consumption Studies for 3G Trafﬁc
Consolidation on Android using WiFi and Bluetooth, Master’s Thesis,
2014. <http://urn.kb.se/resolve?urn=urn:nbn:se:liu:diva-103393>.
[16] Gurobi, Gurobi Optimization, 2013. <http://www.gurobi.com>
(accessed 28.10.13).
[17] D. Camps-Mur, X. Pérez-Costa, S. Sallent-Ribes, Designing energy
efﬁcient access points with Wi-Fi direct, in: Computer Networks,
Elsevier, vol. 55, 2011.
[18] J.W. Yoo, K.H. Park, A cooperative clustering protocol for energy
saving of mobile devices with wlan and bluetooth interfaces, IEEE
Trans. Mob. Comput. 10 (2011) 491–504.
[19] G. Fodor, E. Dahlman, G. Mildh, S. Parkvall, N. Reider, G. Miklos, Z.
Turanyi, Design aspects of network assisted device-to-device
communications, IEEE Commun. Mag. 50 (2012) 170–177.
[20] Wi-Fi Alliance, Wi-Fi Direct, 2013. <http://www.wi-ﬁ.org/discoverandlearn/wi-ﬁ-direct> (accessed 28.10.13).
[21] RLC protocol, 3GPP Speciﬁcation 25.322, 2014. <http://www.3gpp.org/
ftp/Specs/html-info/25322.htm> (accessed 20.10.14).
[22] A. Bianzino, C. Chaudet, D. Rossi, J. Rougier, A survey of green
networking research, IEEE Commun. Surv. Tutorials 14 (2012) 3–20.
[23] W. Hou, L. Guo, X. Wei, X. Gong, Multi-granularity and robust
grooming in power- and port-cost-efﬁcient IP over WDM networks,
in: Computer Networks, Elsevier, vol. 56, 2012, pp. 2383–2399.
[24] Y. Zhang, P. Chowdhury, M. Tornatore, B. Mukherjee, Energy
efﬁciency in telecom optical networks, IEEE Commun. Surv.
Tutorials 12 (2010) 441–458.
[25] M. Etoh, T. Ohya, Y. Nakayama, Energy consumption issues on
mobile network systems, in: Proceedings of the 2008 International
Symposium on Applications and the Internet, IEEE, 2008, pp. 365–
368, http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/SAINT.2008.84.
[26] G. Auer, V. Giannini, C. Desset, I. Godor, P. Skillermark, M. Olsson, M.
Imran, D. Sabella, M. Gonzalez, O. Blume, A. Fehske, How much
energy is needed to run a wireless network? IEEE Wireless Commun.
18 (2011) 40–49.
[27] M. Marsan, L. Chiaraviglio, D. Ciullo, M. Meo, Optimal energy savings
in cellular access networks, in: International Conference on
Communications. ICC Workshops, IEEE, 2009, pp. 1–5, http://
dx.doi.org/10.1109/ICCW.2009.5208045.
[28] Z. Hasan, H. Boostanimehr, V. Bhargava, Green cellular networks: a
survey, some research issues and challenges, IEEE Commun. Surv.
Tutorials 13 (2011) 524–540.
[29] A. Amokrane, R. Langar, R. Boutaba, G. Pujolle, Energy efﬁcient
management framework for multihop TDMA-based wireless
networks, in: Computer Networks, Elsevier, vol. 62, 2014, pp. 29–42.

A.P. Bianzino et al. / Computer Networks 75 (2014) 297–312
[30] G. Classen, A.M.C.A. Koster, A. Schmeink, Robust planning of green
wireless networks, in: 5th International Conference on Network
Games, Control and Optimization, NetGCooP, IEEE, 2011, pp. 1–5.
[31] J. Lorincz, A. Capone, D. Begušic´, Optimized network management
for energy savings of wireless access networks, in: Computer
Networks, Elsevier, 55, 2011, pp. 514–540.
[32] K. Son, H. Kim, Y. Yi, B. Krishnamachari, Base station operation and
user association mechanisms for energy-delay tradeoffs in green
cellular networks, IEEE J. Sel. Areas Commun. 29 (2011) 1525–1536.
[33] F. Alaca, A. Sediq, H. Yanikomeroglu, A genetic algorithm based cell
switch-off scheme for energy saving in dense cell deployments, in:
Globecom Workshops, IEEE, 2012, pp. 63–68, http://dx.doi.org/
10.1109/GLOCOMW.2012.6477545.
[34] R. Mahapatra, A.D. Domenico, R. Gupta, E.C. Strinati, Green
framework for future heterogeneous wireless networks, in:
Computer Networks, Elsevier, vol. 57, 2013, pp. 1518–1528.
[35] N. Vallina-Rodriguez, J. Crowcroft, Energy management techniques
in modern mobile handsets, IEEE Commun. Surv. Tutorials 15 (2013)
179–198.
[36] I. Chlamtac, M. Conti, J.J.-N. Liu, Mobile ad hoc networking:
imperatives and challenges, in: Ad Hoc Networks, Elsevier, vol. 1,
2003, pp. 13–64.
[37] P. Basu, N. Khan, T.D.C. Little, A mobility based metric for clustering
in mobile ad hoc networks, in: International Conference on
Distributed Computing Systems Workshop, IEEE, 2001, pp. 413–
418, http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/CDCS.2001.918738.
[38] E.J. Vergara, S. Nadjm-Tehrani, M. Asplund, U. Zurutuza, Resource
footprint of a manycast protocol implementation on multiple mobile
platforms, in: Proceedings of the 2011 Fifth International Conference
on Next Generation Mobile Applications, Services and Technologies,
NGMAST, IEEE, 2011, pp. 154–160, http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/
NGMAST.2011.36.
[39] S. Trifunovic, B. Distl, D. Schatzmann, F. Legendre, WiFi-Opp: ad-hocless opportunistic networking, in: Proceedings of the 6th ACM
workshop on Challenged networks, CHANTS, 2011, pp. 37–42.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/2030652.2030664.
[40] W.R. Heinzelman, A. Chandrakasan, H. Balakrishnan, Energyefﬁcient communication protocol for wireless microsensor
networks, in: Proceedings of the 33rd Hawaii International
Conference on System Sciences, HICSS, IEEE, 2000, http://
dx.doi.org/10.1109/HICSS.2000.926982.
[41] G. Anastasi, M. Conti, M. Di Francesco, A. Passarella, Energy
conservation in wireless sensor networks: a survey, in: Ad Hoc
Networks, Elsevier, vol. 7, 2009, pp. 537–568.
[42] O. Boyinbode, H. Le, A. Mbogho, M. Takizawa, R. Poliah, A survey on
clustering algorithms for wireless sensor networks, in: 13th
International Conference on Network-Based Information Systems,
NBiS, IEEE, 2010, pp. 358–364, http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/
NBiS.2010.59.
[43] G.P. Perrucci, F.H.P. Fitzek, Q. Zhang, M.D. Katz, Cooperative mobile
web browsing, EURASIP J. Wireless Commun. Netw. 2009 (2009).
[44] L. Al-Kanj, Z. Dawy, Impact of network parameters on the design of
energy-aware cooperative content distribution protocols, in:
Transactions on Emerging Telecommunications Technologies,
Wiley, vol. 24, 2013, pp. 317–330.
[45] E. Yaacoub, H. Ghazzai, M.-S. Alouini, A. Abu-Dayya, Achieving energy
efﬁciency in LTE with joint D2D communications and green
networking
techniques,
in:
9th
International
Wireless
Communications and Mobile Computing Conference, IWCMC, IEEE,
2013, pp. 270–275, http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/IWCMC.2013.6583571.
[46] M.-H. Chen, C.-F. Chou, K.-H. Lee, C.-Y. Chang, On cooperative
energy-efﬁcient p2p live streaming system for mobile hotspots, in:
IEEE International Conference on Green Computing and
Communications, GreenCom, 2013. http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/
GreenCom-iThings-CPSCom.2013.53.
[47] B. Han, P. Hui, V. Kumar, M. Marathe, J. Shao, A. Srinivasan, Mobile
data ofﬂoading through opportunistic communications and social
participation, IEEE Trans. Mob. Comput. 11 (2012) 821–834.
[48] G.P. Perrucci, P. Anggraeni, S. Wardana, F.H.P. Fitzek, M. Katz, Bioinspired energy-aware protocol design for cooperative wireless
networks, Int. J. Autonom. Adapt. Commun. Syst., Indersci. 4
(2011) 164–179.
[49] A. Asadi, V. Mancuso, Energy efﬁcient opportunistic uplink packet
forwarding in hybrid wireless networks, in: Proceedings of the 4th
International Conference on Future Energy Systems, e-Energy, ACM,
2013, pp. 261–262, http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/2487166.2487197.
[50] A. Sharma, V. Navda, R. Ramjee, V.N. Padmanabhan, E.M. Belding,
Cool-tether: energy efﬁcient on-the-ﬂy WiFi hot-spots using mobile

[51]
[52]

[53]

[54]

[55]

[56]

[57]

[58]

[59]

[60]

[61]
[62]

[63]

[64]

311

phones, in: Proceedings of the 5th International Conference on
Emerging Networking Experiments and Technologies, CoNEXT, ACM,
2009, pp. 109–120, http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/1658939.1658952.
L. Guo, X. Ding, H. Wang, Q. Li, S. Chen, X. Zhang, Cooperative relay
service in a wireless LAN, IEEE J. Sel. Areas Commun. 25 (2007) 355–368.
H. Luo, R. Ramjee, P. Sinha, L.E. Li, S. Lu, UCAN: a uniﬁed cellular and
ad-hoc network architecture, in: Proceedings of the 9th Annual
International Conference on Mobile Computing and Networking,
MobiCom, ACM, 2003, pp. 353–367, http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/
938985.939021.
T. Pering, Y. Agarwal, R. Gupta, R. Want, Coolspots: reducing the
power consumption of wireless mobile devices with multiple radio
interfaces, in: Proceedings of the 4th International Conference on
Mobile Systems, Applications and Services, MobiSys, ACM, 2006, pp.
220–232, http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/1134680.1134704.
A. Balasubramanian, R. Mahajan, A. Venkataramani, Augmenting
mobile 3G using WiFi, in: Proceedings of the 8th International
Conference on Mobile Systems, Applications, and Services, MobiSys,
ACM, 2010, pp. 209–222, http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/1814433.
1814456.
M.-R. Ra, J. Paek, A.B. Sharma, R. Govindan, M.H. Krieger, M.J. Neely,
Energy-delay tradeoffs in smartphone applications, in: Proceedings
of the 8th International Conference on Mobile Systems, Applications,
and Services, MobiSys, ACM, 2010, pp. 255–270, http://dx.doi.org/
10.1145/1814433.1814459.
M. Nam, N. Choi, Y. Seok, Y. Choi, WISE: energy-efﬁcient interface
selection on vertical handoff between 3G networks and WLANs, in:
Proceedings of the 15th IEEE International Symposium on Personal,
Indoor and Mobile Radio Communications, vol. 1, PIMRC, 2004, pp.
692–698. http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/PIMRC.2004.1370959.
B.D. Higgins, A. Reda, T. Alperovich, J. Flinn, T.J. Giuli, B. Noble, D.
Watson, Intentional networking: opportunistic exploitation of mobile
network diversity, in: Proceedings of the Sixteenth Annual International
Conference on Mobile Computing and Networking, MobiCom, ACM,
2010, pp. 73–84, http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/1859995.1860005.
J. Rodriguez, M. Tsagaropoulos, I. Politis, S. Kotsopoulos, T. Dagiuklas,
A middleware architecture supporting seamless and secure
multimedia services across an intertechnology radio access
network, IEEE Wireless Commun. 16 (2009) 24–31.
K. Keshav, V. Indukuri, P. Venkataram, Energy efﬁcient scheduling in
4G smart phones for mobile hotspot application, in: National
Conference on Communications, NCC, IEEE, 2012, pp. 1–5, http://
dx.doi.org/10.1109/NCC.2012.6176904.
A. Radwan, J. Rodriguez, l. Gomes, E. Sá, C2POWER approach for
power saving in multi-standard wireless devices, in: J. Rodriguez, R.
Tafazolli, C. Verikoukis (Eds.), 6th International ICST Conference on
Mobile Multimedia Communications, MOBIMEDIA 2010, LNICST,
vol. 77, Springer, 2012, pp. 440–451, http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/9783-642-35155-6_35.
B. Wang, K. Liu, Advances in cognitive radio networks: a survey, IEEE
J. Sel. Top. Signal Process. 5 (2011) 5–23.
J. Marinho, E. Monteiro, Cognitive radio: survey on communication
protocols, spectrum decision issues, and future research directions,
in: Wireless Networks, Kluwer Academic Publishers, vol. 18, 2012,
pp. 147–164.
L. Lei, Z. Zhong, C. Lin, X. Shen, Operator controlled device-to-device
communications in LTE-advanced networks, IEEE Wireless Commun.
19 (2012) 96–104.
C. Curescu, S. Nadjm-Tehrani, A bidding algorithm for optimized
utility-based resource allocation in ad hoc networks, IEEE Trans.
Mob. Comput. 7 (2008) 1397–1414.

Aruna Prem Bianzino (M’09) is a postdoc
researcher at the Real-Time Systems Laboratory in Linköping University, in Linköping,
Sweden. He received his M.Sc. degree from
the Politecnico di Torino, Italy, in 2008 and his
Ph.D. degree from the Telecom ParisTech
Institute, in Paris, France, in 2012. His
research interests include green networking,
trafﬁc engineering and distributed algorithms.

312

A.P. Bianzino et al. / Computer Networks 75 (2014) 297–312

Mikael Asplund is an Assistant Professor at
the Real-time Systems Group in Linköping
University, Sweden. From 2011–2012 he
worked one year as a Research Fellow in
Trinity College, Dublin. He received his M.Sc.
degree in Computer Science and Engineering
in 2005 and his Ph.D. in Computer Science in
2011 both from Linköping University. His
Ph.D. thesis focused on design and analysis of
partition-tolerant
distributed
systems,
including development of middleware services for maintaining consistency and information dissemination algorithms for disaster area networks. His current
research interests include dependable distributed systems, mobile and
vehicular computing and real-time systems.

Ekhiotz Jon Vergara is a Ph.D. student at the
Real-time Systems Group in Linöping University, Sweden. He received his B.Sc. and
M.Sc. degrees in Telecommunication Engineering from Mondragon University, Spain.
Since 2011 he has been working on energyefﬁcient solutions for wireless communication at the user end. His research interests
include wireless networking, distributed systems and green computing.

Simin Nadjm-Tehrani received her B.Sc.
degree from Manchester University, UK, and
did her postgraduate studies leading to a Ph.D.
in Computer Science at Linköping University,
Sweden, in 1994. During 2006–2008 she was a
full professor at University of Luxembourg, and
is currently a Professor in Dependable Distributed Systems at Department of Computer and
Information Science, Linköping University,
where she has led the Real-time Systems Laboratory since 2000. Her research interests
relate to networks and systems with dependability requirements and resource constraints.

