Computer Networks 91 (2015) 1–25

Contents lists available at ScienceDirect

Computer Networks
journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/comnet

AFAR: A robust and delay-constrained communication
framework for smart grid applications
Kangho Kim a, Hwantae Kim b, Jongtack Jung a, Hwangnam Kim a,∗
a
b

School of Electrical Engineering, Korea University, Seoul, Republic of Korea
LG Electronics, Seoul, Republic of Korea

a r t i c l e

i n f o

Article history:
Received 19 June 2014
Revised 10 July 2015
Accepted 7 August 2015
Available online 15 August 2015
Keywords:
Smart grid
Field area network
Home area network
Communication framework
Geographic forwarding

a b s t r a c t
The existing electrical grid is now experiencing a revolutionary change to a new paradigm, i.e.,
smart grid, due to the development of information and communication technologies. Communications among smart grid components such as sensors, intelligent electronic devices (IED),
and smart meters of automatic metering infrastructure (AMI) are some of the key components
to successfully build smart grid. To reduce installation costs and spatial limits, wireless communications are considered as effective communication techniques in smart grid. However,
severe wireless interference due to the electromagnetic wave generated by electronic devices,
and strict requirements of smart grid applications such as delay-constraint, short delay, reliability, and scalability are making existing network protocols inappropriate for smart grid
applications. In this paper, we propose AFAR to provide robust and delay-constrained communication services to smart grid applications while satisfying their requirements successfully.
This paper includes a detailed description of the framework, mathematical modeling, OPNET
simulation, and co-simulation between OpenDSS and OPNET to evaluate AFAR under the speciﬁc smart grid application scenario.
© 2015 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

1. Introduction
Due to the development of thyristor by General Electric
in 1957, AC based electrical grid, ﬁrst established in the end
of the 19th century, has made a technological break-through
in power grid. Since then, gradual improvements have been
made to the system while providing electricity service for
decades. In such electrical grid, large power companies supply electricity to the end users of the system in a unidirectional way, and the users passively consume the energy and
pay for their usages [1,2]. According to the developments
of communication technologies, sensor technology, intelligent electronic device (IED), and reusable energy generation,
∗

Corresponding author. Tel.: +82 2 3290 4821.
E-mail addresses: mybalam2k@korea.ac.kr (K. Kim),
hwantae.kim@lge.com (H. Kim), skylover89@korea.ac.kr (J. Jung),
hnkim@korea.ac.kr (H. Kim).
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.comnet.2015.08.001
1389-1286/© 2015 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

electric grid is now changing its structure from passive to active, and from unidirectional to bidirectional [2]. This kind of
electrical grid is called smart grid. In smart grid, a user can
schedule his or her electricity usage plan effectively and intelligently since it is possible for each user to get information of electrical grid [3]. Moreover, each end-user can be not
only an electricity consumer but also an electricity producer
due to the existence of a number of distributed energy resources [4]. Large power companies also can take advantages
of smart grid technology by adopting it to their own facilities
such as power plant, substation, power line, and any other
components consisting of electrical grids. As a result, power
supply procedures can be more reliable and cost-eﬃcient.
In addition, electrical accidents such as blackout can be
prevented [5].
To realize the smart grid system, smart grid speciﬁc communication technologies are essential [12]. However, due to
the diversity of applications and components of smart grid,

2

K. Kim et al. / Computer Networks 91 (2015) 1–25
Table 1
Typical response time of smart grid applications.
Application

Response time

Protection
Control
Monitoring
Metering/billing
Reporting

1–10 ms
100 ms
1s
1 h to 1 day
1 day

technical requirements of the communication protocols for
smart grid are quite different from those of other common
network services. Although the level of requirements is all
different depending on the type of each smart grid application and component, what they have in common is that their
degree of communication delay should be strictly bounded,
and that the communication should be reliable [7–10]. If
those conditions are not satisﬁed, it is hard to manage the
smart grid system in eﬃcient ways, since exchanged data become meaningless due to the ever-changing characteristics
of the power system. In worst case, entire electric power system may suffer from catastrophic failure. Table 1 shows the
acceptable maximum response time of typical smart grid applications reported by ETSI technical report [11].
Communication technologies in smart grid can be classiﬁed into two broad categories, which are wired technologies
and wireless technologies [12]. Wired communications can
easily satisfy the requirements of smart grid communications
in terms of high bandwidth, delay constraint, and robustness, due to the presence of the separated communication
medium between two nodes from other neighbors. Therefore, wired networks usually operate as a backbone network
of smart grid [7]. Nevertheless, scalability cannot be obtained
with the wired communication technologies, since communication cable should be installed between all desired links.
As the scale of networks becomes larger, this will cause an
enormous installation cost. Moreover, due to the presence of
the cable, available installation sites of the devices are highly
constrained.
On the other hand, wireless communications can be characterized as having speciﬁc advantages such as scalability,
low installation cost, and free installation site [6,7,12]. Hence,
there are numerous research attempts to apply wireless communication technologies to the ﬁeld area network (FAN) and
home area network (HAN) of the smart grid communication
architecture. However, wireless channels suffer from hostile radio environments due to the various types of interferences such as shadowing, reﬂection, refraction, scattering, diffraction, inter-symbol interference, and shading. The
factors mentioned above keep wireless communications incapable of achieving reliable, robust, and delay constrained
communications. Especially, in smart grid, the channel conditions are harsher than those of typical wireless environments. The average noise levels, path loss exponent, and a degree of ﬂuctuation of the wireless channels are signiﬁcantly
high because of the noise generated by the equipment, electromagnetic interference and dense deployment of the obstacles [6,13–15]. Therefore, developing a wireless communication protocol under those severe channel conditions while
satisfying smart grid application requirements is one of key
research challenges in the ﬁeld of smart grid networking.

In this paper, we propose an adaptive forwarding area
based routing framework, AFAR, to provide reliable, delayconstrained, and low-delayed routing scheme for smart grid
applications operating in home area network (HAN) and ﬁeld
area network (FAN). In smart grid, it is impossible for single
communication protocol to meet all kinds of requirements of
diverse smart grid applications, because their purposes and
installation environments are all different. Instead, what is
important is to build a generic algorithm that can be applied
to each application with little modiﬁcations on it to meet application requirements. In this context, AFAR is designed to
cover the elemental networking requirements of HAN and
FAN level smart grid applications: reliable packet delivery,
robustness with respect to the severe channel conditions,
low communication delay, bounded delay, energy eﬃcient,
scalability, and basic network level functions such as multicasting, broadcasting, and network level caching scheme. As
a result, smart grid devices, such as sensors, IEDs, and smart
meters, can adopt AFAR as their basic network scheme, with
little modiﬁcation for their own purposes.
The end-to-end packet delivery algorithm of AFAR does
not have any prior routing procedure. When a node receives
a data packet from its neighbor, it decides forwarding region
instantly, by exploiting the location information of the sender
node, destination node, and itself to determine whether the
packet should be relayed or not. Within the forwarding region, there can be multiple paths to the destination, which
makes communication reliable. Moreover, it prevents too
many nodes joining the forwarding procedure.
We implemented the proposed AFAR in OPNET simulator and carried out an extensive set of simulation studies to
evaluate the performances of the framework in comparison
with other routing protocols. Moreover, by performing cosimulation between OPNET and OpenDSS with speciﬁc smart
grid scenario, we evaluated that a routing protocol of AFAR is
appropriate for smart grid applications.
The rest of the paper is organized as follows. In Section 2,
we brieﬂy explain the characteristics of communication networks in smart grid. In Section 3, we describe the proposed
AFAR. Section 4 determines the forwarding angle, which
is a core parameter of the proposed framework. Then, in
Section 5, we evaluate the performance of the proposed
framework. The Section 5 includes OPNET simulation results
and smart grid application level simulation results obtained
by co-simulating OPNET and OpenDSS. Finally, we conclude
the paper with Section 6.
2. Preliminaries
In general, communication networks in smart grid can be
classiﬁed into three categories: wide area networks (WAN),
ﬁeld area networks (FAN), and home area networks (HAN)
[7,9,16]. WAN operates as core network and connects widely
distributed smart grid components. Due to its wide coverage area and large amount of traﬃc, WAN is usually composed of wired network infrastructures such as power line
communication (PLC) [17] and optical ﬁber, or long-distance
broadband wireless communications such as satellite and
WiMax (IEEE 802.16) [18]. FAN, also referred to neighborhood
area networks (NAN), is deployed in electricity distribution
feeder and substation, and it is responsible for connecting

K. Kim et al. / Computer Networks 91 (2015) 1–25

sensors and IED devices. In addition, FAN is responsible for
connecting smart meters to local access point for advanced
metering infrastructure (AMI) applications. Since there are
a large number of heterogeneous sensors and devices, scalability and heterogeneity are important issues to successfully monitor and control the distribution system [7,10]. HAN
connects customer domain electronic devices to the outside
gateway so that smart grid applications such as AMI and demand response (DR) can be implemented. Moreover, by monitoring and controlling the electricity usage of appliances,
energy management system (EMS) or home automation can
be applied. HAN is usually implemented with low data rate
and low cost network infrastructures such as ZigBee (IEEE
802.15.4) [19] and Wi-Fi (IEEE 802.11).
Wireless communication technologies are widely
adopted in HAN and FAN of smart grid. A large number
of sensors, IED devices, and smart meters are connected
to each other through the wireless medium due to its low
spatial limits and installation costs. However, there are a
number of challenges for designing a wireless communication protocol in smart grid environments. First, many
researches argue that wireless links in smart grid environments are different from those of typical wireless networks
[6,13–15]. Electromagnetic interference generated by electrical equipments, such as generator, transformer, and power
line, causes wireless links to be highly unreliable and lowers
the packet delivery ratio between control unit and the end
devices. Moreover, in FAN, scalability and heterogeneity are
important requirements because data are often collected
from a large number of diverse devices. Service-oriented
middleware was designed to deal with this problem but
it still requires reliable and eﬃcient communication infrastructure [10]. For substation automation, distributed
energy resources (DER), and electric vehicles (EV), short and
bounded communication delay is important to implement
real-time smart grid applications [8,20]. In these systems,
communication delay can signiﬁcantly inﬂuence the quality
of experience (QoE), so delay-aware scheduling scheme was
designed to deal with this problem [20]. Security, bursty and
periodic traﬃc characteristics, quality of service (QoS), reliability, multicast, geographical device management, message
prioritization, data aggregation, and several other issues are
also considered as important issues for designing smart grid
communication protocol [7–10]. These strict requirements
for a communication protocol make wireless communication
technologies inappropriate for smart grid.
To provide wireless communication under the obstacles
mentioned above, several routing protocols were proposed
[16]. Although there are a variety of routing protocols
in multi-hop communication networks, their underlying
philosophies can be categorized into two types: proactive routing and reactive routing. Proactive routing, also
referred to as table-driven routing, maintains routing information for all known destinations based on link-state and
distance-vector algorithms. OLSR is one of the representative
proactive routing protocols which is suitable for large and
dense networks [21]. In OLSR, multipoint relays (MPRs)
are selected, and only MPRs participate in route generation
process to reduce routing overhead. However, in smart grid
environments, since link status is extremely unreliable due
to severe interferences, proactive routing protocols may not

3

Fig. 1. AFAR in a protocol stack.

be appropriate because reliability of their predeﬁned routes
cannot be guaranteed. In contrast, reactive routing protocols
set up routes to the destination only if it is needed. AODV
[22] is a typical reactive algorithm. When a source node has
messages to be transmitted, it broadcasts route requests
(RREQ) to ﬁnd a route to the destination. When destination
receives RREQ, it transmits route reply (RREP) to the source
node. Although it establishes a route when transmission is
scheduled, the large control message overheads signiﬁcantly
lower the throughput and cause wide variations in endto-end delay. Flooding is a simple reactive routing protocol
which broadcasts data packets whenever it receives packets,
while expecting that it will be delivered to the destination
eventually. Although ﬂooding has no control message overheads and does not maintain predeﬁned routes, its large
number of data packet duplications cause the well-known
broadcast storm problem and thus signiﬁcantly degrade the
performance of the network [23].
3. Framework description
As discussed in Section 1, AFAR is the network level smart
grid communication framework that can be used in HAN and
FAN with diverse purposes, such as control, monitoring, and
reporting. In smart grid, it is impossible for single communication protocol to meet all kinds of requirements of diverse
smart grid applications, because their purposes and installation environments are all different. A probable solution is to
design an exclusive entire communication protocol for each
smart grid application, but it is ineﬃcient. When viewed in
terms of a layered structure of the network, physical and MAC
layer are strongly related to environmental speciﬁc features
such as modulation, data rate, channel sensing, transmission range, etc. On the other hand, network layer deals with
relatively common features such as routing and addressing.
Those features can be used in a wide range of smart grid applications, because what every application expects for network layer to guarantee is short and bounded end-to-end
delay and reliable communication. Therefore, what is important is to build AFAR as an independent basic network layer
which reﬂects elemental characteristics of smart grid environments (e.g., unreliable channel condition) and guarantees
the common requirements (e.g., short and constrained endto-end delay, reliability).
Fig. 1 depicts the position of AFAR in a protocol stack. Each
smart grid component can change PHY/MAC layer according to their purposes. For example, thermal sensors that are

4

K. Kim et al. / Computer Networks 91 (2015) 1–25

Fig. 2. The structure of multi-dimensional, multi-tier address format.

spread over solar power plants may use 802.15.4 PHY/MAC
with AFAR to achieve energy eﬃcient, reliable, and delay constrained communications. On the other hand, AMI can use
802.11 PHY/MAC to acquire high data rate. Likewise, additional layer can be placed between AFAR and the application
layer to satisfy further application speciﬁc requirements.
In this section, we provide detailed explanation about
AFAR. Components of AFAR can be classiﬁed into two categories: basic framework and extension framework.

3.1. Basic framework
The basic framework is essential part of AFAR. It has two
goals: one is to provide a short and constrained delay, and the
other is to provide reliable end-to-end packet delivery. The
basic framework consists of two elements: multi-dimensional
multi-tier address and geographic forwarding. We assume that
each node is aware of its geographic information. This information can be provided at initial installation stage, or can
be continuously updated by using positioning technologies.
In outdoor environment, geographic information can be easily obtained from GPS unit [24]. In indoor environment, GPS
shows large localization error due to the attenuation and the
scattering of satellite signals, so an indoor positioning system (IPS) [25–27] can be used instead. We note that this assumption is widely used in many other geographic routing
researches [28–30].

3.1.1. Multi-dimensional multi-tier address
The packet forwarding process of AFAR is fundamentally
based on the geographic information of a node that transmitted the packet, a destination node, and a node itself. Therefore, when a node transmits a packet, geographic information
should be included in an additional ﬁeld of a packet. If the
address of a node is designed based on its geographic information, there is no need to assign additional ﬁeld in a packet
for geographic information. In this context, we devise a multidimensional multi-tier address format. The address format basically consists of two dimensions: a location-speciﬁc dimension and a device-speciﬁc dimension. The location speciﬁc
dimension contains geographic information of each node,
and the device speciﬁc dimension consists of several device
information. The basic structure of multi-dimensional multitier address is presented in Fig. 2.
The location-speciﬁc ﬁeld can be divided into multiple region levels. Instead of using GPS coordinates, AFAR uses relative positioning scheme. The geographic information is translated into binary numbers in a hierarchical way as presented
in Fig. 3. As shown in the left ﬁgure of Fig. 3, a network is
partitioned into four regions. Two bit binary number is assigned to each region according to its relative position to the
virtual-origin. In this manner, each region can be divided into
four sub-regions as shown in the right ﬁgure of Fig. 3. Each
sub-region can be speciﬁed using two-tier binary numbers.
For example, in Fig. 3, the second sub-region from the top
left corner to the right can be pinpointed with address of 00
10. Each sub-region can be recursively divided into additional
sub-regions by using the same method until the required accuracy is satisﬁed or the address size is used up. When a node
moves to a different region, it updates its location-speciﬁc
ﬁeld to support mobility.
The device-speciﬁc ﬁeld basically contains device type,
function, and node number information. There are a variety of

Fig. 3. Hierarchical structure and addressing of location-speciﬁc ﬁelds in multi-dimensional, multi-tier address format.

K. Kim et al. / Computer Networks 91 (2015) 1–25

5

heterogeneous sensors and devices in smart grid networks.
By inserting device type information and function information
in the address structure, each node can easily distinguish the
packet of interest from the others. To be more speciﬁc, the device type stands for the relatively broad level of classiﬁcation
(e.g., smart meter, energy management unit, IED, and sensor).
On the other hand, the function indicates a speciﬁc purpose of
the device. For example, for a illumination sensor deployed in
a solar plant, the device type is set to sensor, and the function
is set to illumination. The node number is designed to provide
global uniqueness to every node in the network. There can be
more than a single node in a certain sub-region that their device types and functions are the same. By assigning different
node numbers to those nodes, unique address can be provided
to every node in the network.
In addition to the basic two-dimensional address format,
additional dimension can be added to provide more elaborate addresses.
3.1.2. Geographic forwarding
The routing process of AFAR is basically based on the geographic forwarding. When a node receives a data packet, it
decides whether to forward a packet or drop it according to
the metric called forwarding area. In geographic forwarding,
the forwarding decision is made instantly when a node receives a data packet. Therefore, no prior route establishment
procedure is required. There are two stages in geographic forwarding. The ﬁrst stage is in charge of delivering a packet to
the smallest sub-region where a destination node belongs to.
In the second stage, the packet is delivered to the destination
node using in-region ﬂooding scheme. A detailed explanation
of each stage is described in the rest of this section.
In the ﬁrst stage, when a node receives a packet, it compares location-speciﬁc ﬁeld of its own address with that of
the destination address. If they are the same, it moves on to
the second stage because it means that they are in the same
sub-region. Otherwise, the node determines forwarding area.
If the node is located within the forwarding area, it forwards
the packet. Otherwise, it simply discards the packet. The
forwarding area, which is also referred as forwarding sector, is
decided using the given forwarding angle and the geographic
information of the destination node and the node which
transmitted the packet. Fig. 4 describes how the forwarding
decision is made by an intermediate node at the ﬁrst stage of
the geographic forwarding. The small black circle at the center
of the ﬁgure denotes the node that transmitted the packet.
When a neighbor node receives a packet, it determines
target direction vector using the geographic information
of the destination node and the node that transmitted the
packet. These information can be easily obtained from the
location-speciﬁc ﬁeld of addresses included in the packet
header. Based on this target vector and forwarding angle θ f ,
the receiving node decides forwarding sector. The forwarding
sector is the circular sector with central angle of θ f and radius
of transmission range. It has the target vector as its centerline. And then, the receiving node determines a receiving
vector using the location information of the node itself and
the node that transmitted the packet. Again, the location
information of the previous hop node can be easily obtained
from the node’s location-speciﬁc ﬁeld. If an absolute angle
between the target vector and the receiving vector is smaller

Fig. 4. The forwarding principle at the ﬁrst stage in the geographic
forwarding.

than θ f /2, it is evident that the receiving node is located in
the forwarding sector. Therefore, in this case, the receiver
node forwards a packet. In case of Fig. 4, the node presented
as the dashed circle with an angle θ 1 forwards the received
packet, and the node depicted as the X marked circle with
an angle θ 2 discards the packet. When a node receives a
same packet twice, which is relayed from different neighbor
nodes, it drops the packet to reduce unnecessary traﬃc. As
discussed in Section 3.1.1, there can be multiple nodes in a
single sub-region if the allowed size of the location-speciﬁc
ﬁeld is not large enough to provide high geographic precision for nodes. In this case, the location-speciﬁc ﬁeld of the
transmitting node and the receiving node might be identical,
thus, the receiving node cannot determine the receiving
vector. To deal with this problem, when the location-speciﬁc
ﬁeld of the transmitting node’s address and that of the
receiving node’s address are identical, the receiving node
simply forwards the received packet unless it is not in the
same sub-region with the destination node.
When the location-speciﬁc ﬁeld of the destination node’s
address and that of the receiving node’s address are same, the
receiving node compares rest of the address ﬁelds to check
whether it is the destination or not. If not, it moves on to the
second stage to deliver the packet to the destination. Since
all nodes in the same sub-region have the same locationspeciﬁc ﬁeld address, their geographic information cannot be
distinguished by comparing the location-speciﬁc ﬁeld of addresses. In this case, geographic forwarding cannot be utilized.
In the second stage, the target direction vector and the receiving vector are not used. Instead, a packet is delivered to the
destination using in-region ﬂooding. In this scheme, the received packet is marked as in-region packet to suppress nodes
in other regions from forwarding a packet. After marking the
packet, the receiving node broadcasts it. The in-region packet
is only able to be forwarded by the nodes in the same subregion with the destination node. In other words, if nodes in

6

K. Kim et al. / Computer Networks 91 (2015) 1–25

Fig. 5. Data deliveries at the second stage in the geographic forwarding.

neighboring regions receive a in-region packet, they simply
drop it. Fig. 5 illustrates the message forwarding at the second stage in the geographic forwarding. As can be seen in the
ﬁgure, only nodes in the same region with the destination
node broadcasts a packet.
The important parameter in the geographic forwarding is
the forwarding angle since it actually determines the forwarding sector, in turn decides the number of one-hop neighbors
in the forwarding sector, and ﬁnally inﬂuences on the channel
usage and the reliability. It will be introduced in the Section 4
how the forwarding angle θ f is optimally determined depending on the network conditions.
The advantages of geographic forwarding in smart grid
environments can be summarized in three points:
(i) Since there is no prior routing process in geographic
forwarding, it has short and bounded end-to-end delay compared to other ad-hoc network protocols.
(ii) Scalability can be guaranteed because there is no routing process, and forwarding region adaptively changes
its coverage by modifying forwarding angle that is
determined by various network parameters, such as
node density and transmission range.
(iii) Packet delivery based on forwarding region means that
there exist multiple paths between source and destination. Therefore, reliable communication can be performed, even if wireless link states are unreliable.
First, due to the electromagnetic interference generated
by the equipment, wireless channel has a high average noise
level and ever-changing characteristic [6,13–15]. For that reason, pre-deﬁned routing paths are extremely unreliable. Consequently, smart grid networks can be compared to ad-hoc
networks while their link connectivity and reachability keep
changing. Most of ad-hoc network protocols have routing
process to obtain routes to destinations, which yields large
amount of undesired delays. With those delays, short delay
requirements of smart grid applications cannot be achieved.

Moreover, since the topological variation of the smart grid
network (due to the dynamic link states) makes the routing delay keep changing, end-to-end delay cannot be constrained. On the contrary, the geographic forwarding does not
require additional routing process. When a node receives a
packet from its neighbor, it decides whether to forward or
drop the packet using geographic information of the sender.
Therefore, end-to-end delay is exactly the same as the time
consumed during data delivered along the shortest and successful path to the destination. Consequently, delay requirements can be achieved.
Second, the geographic forwarding has advantages in network scalability. Smart grid networks consist of from dozens
to more than thousands of nodes. As the size of a networks
increases, many existing ﬂat-routed ad-hoc network protocols have scalability problems due to the large routing delays [31]. Likewise, in case of basic ﬂooding scheme, the wellknown broadcast storm happens and thus the performance of
the network is signiﬁcantly degraded as the number of nodes
in the network increases [23]. However, the geographic forwarding is relatively free from those network scalability issues since it does not have additional routing process which
produces large amount of routing delay. Moreover, broadcast
storm problem can be prevented because its overall end-toend forwarding region is effectively limited through the forwarding angle, which is determined based on the size of the
network.
Lastly, the geographic forwarding guarantees the reliability even in severe wireless environments. Forwarding region
based ﬂooding algorithm implies that there exist multiple
paths toward the destination. Hence, if certain node fails to
deliver a packet to the next hop node, other nearby nodes
can successfully forward the packet toward the destination.
For this reason, geographic forwarding is much more reliable
than other existing unicast based routing algorithms.
3.2. Extension framework
The extension framework includes extra components that
can enhance the performance of AFAR in speciﬁc smart grid
scenario. In this section, we propose geographic multicast and
network-level caching. Components in the extension framework can be optionally enabled or disabled according to the
needs of applications.
3.2.1. Geographic multicast
One of the important functional requirements of smart
grid applications is multicast support [7–9]. As mentioned in
[8], AMI, demand response (DR), distributed energy resource
(DER), microgrid, and substation automation all have multicast service as a common requirement. By performing multicast, a source node can send its message to multiple destinations at once. As a result, the channel utilization can be
improved and the number of transmissions can be reduced.
AFAR provides geographic multicast service for smart grid
applications, in which multicast functionality is required
for regional monitoring, controlling, and managing smart
grid infrastructures such as wind power plant, solar power
plant, substation, power lines, and AMI networks. The geographic multicast can be easily implemented using the multidimensional multi-tier address. As discussed in Section 3.1.1,

K. Kim et al. / Computer Networks 91 (2015) 1–25

the location-speciﬁc ﬁeld of multi-dimensional multi-tier address includes geographic information of each node. Since
nodes in the same grid region have identical location-speciﬁc
ﬁeld, it is possible for a source node to multicast a single
packet to all nodes within the target region without making
virtual address or group ID. For example, if the node number
ﬁeld in destination address is set to zero, the packet can be
regarded as a multicast message, and all the nodes within the
destination region can accept the packet. Alternatively, additional dimension can be included in the multi-dimensional
multi-tier address format to support more high-dimensional
multicast services, such as multi-region multicast.
Another advantage of the geographic multicast technique
comes from the fact that it is possible for a source node to
send a message to target nodes within a certain region without the need of speciﬁc information (e.g., unique ID) of each
node. A possible multicast scenario in the smart grid system
is as follows. In a solar power plant where illumination sensors are uniformly distributed over the system, a central controller can collect the illumination levels of speciﬁc region by
sending request messages to sensor nodes in the target region. When each sensor receives the request message, it send
a reply message to the controller with the illumination data
in it. In this scenario, geographic multicast can signiﬁcantly
reduce traﬃc amounts, different from unicast which sends
individual request message to each sensor.
3.2.2. Network-level caching
Wireless sensor network (WSN) plays an important role in
a smart grid system. They are deployed in diverse smart grid
environments such as power plant, substation, power line,
power room, and even in the home area to monitor the system. In WSN, multiple messages destined to the same sink
node can be generated and transmitted since one event may
be detected by multiple sensors. Also, if the sink node sends
request messages to multiple sensors close to each other, a
number of reply messages will be generated and will traverse
through the similar routing path. As a result, the number of
message transmissions may signiﬁcantly increase, and this
can not only increase the end-to-end delay, but also reduce
the network life time by dissipating the remaining energy
of sensor nodes. To deal with those problems, AFAR includes
a network-level caching scheme as an extension framework
component. The network-level caching can be used in two
cases.
First, it can be used for collecting periodic data of neighboring nodes. In this case, a received information is stored at
a cache of a caching node in a ﬁrst-in-ﬁrst-out (FIFO) manner. When a new data is received, the caching node checks
whether the data type corresponds to its interest. The types
of packets can be easily obtained from the source address due
to the use of multi-dimensional multi-tier address format. If so,
it enqueues the received data with the time information at
the tail of the cache. If the cache is full, data at the front of
the cache is removed. Also, if a time information of the data
at the front of the cache exceeds the predeﬁned timeout, the
data is removed from the cache. The stored data can be provided to the sink node in a publish/subscribe manner.
Second, the network-level caching can be used to aggregate response messages of neighboring nodes. When the sink
node issues request messages to multiple target nodes in

7

the network, each node sends a reply message to the local caching node, not directly to the sink node. The caching
node aggregates them into a single message to reduce the
amount of network traﬃc, and sends the aggregated message to the sink node. In smart grid, each application has its
own response time limit. Therefore, a caching node should
not wait for neighboring nodes longer than a time period
that would violate the response time limit policy of an application. When a caching node receives a request message
from the sink node, it can obtain the response time limit information from the request message, and also can estimate
the end-to-end delay between the sink node and the caching
node. Based on these information, a caching period can be
determined. The degree of conservativeness of caching period can be varied from application to application. During the
caching period, the caching node waits for neighboring nodes
messages. At the end of the caching period, the caching node
aggregates all the received reply messages into a single message and sends it to the sink node. If additional reply messages are delivered from neighboring nodes after the caching
period is over, the caching node instantly sends the received
reply messages to the sink node. As a result, reply messages
can be delivered to the sink node without violating the response time limit of the application. This scenario also corresponds to the case where the sink node sends the request
message using geographic multicast scheme of Section 3.2.1.
By using the network-level caching scheme, the number
of packet transmissions can be signiﬁcantly reduced. Therefore, the lifetime of sensor nodes and the channel utilization
can be increased. Moreover, the bottleneck problem in the
sink node can be mitigated. If each sensor node transmits an
event message to the sink node at the same time, sink node
may suffer from a burst of messages delivered in short time
period. This problem can lower the successful packet delivery ratio and can increase the end-to-end delay. If multiple
events are occurred at the same time in the different part of
the networks, the situation may result in the total receiving
failure.
In AFAR, the caching nodes are assumed to have advertising function so that it can announce other neighbor nodes
about its position and type information. Receiver nodes
can easily get those information by decoding the multidimensional multi-tier address of the sender node. Moreover,
the caching nodes are assumed to have high computing power
so that it can aggregate and summarize the received messages into a single message. The suﬃcient level of remaining
energy is also an important condition for selecting caching
nodes. The caching node should be able to handle the additional energy consumption generated from the aggregating
process. If all nodes have the same computing power and
energy condition, a probable solution is to select a node in
the center of each sub-region as the caching node of that region. We note that the network-level caching can be applied
not only in WSN, but also in AMI networks since each smart
meter periodically sends power usage data to the central
controller.
4. Determining the forwarding angle θ f
In this section, we present a mathematical model describing the packet delivery ratio (PDR) of the geographic

8

K. Kim et al. / Computer Networks 91 (2015) 1–25

forwarding in order to ﬁgure out the optimal forwarding
angle θ f under given network conditions. We ﬁrst present
underlying assumptions of our network model. Under those
assumptions, we ﬁgure out the probability that a node
actually transmits a packet in a randomly chosen time slot.
Then we derive the success probability of one hop transmission between two nodes. With those results, we obtain the
end-to-end packet delivery ratio and determine the optimal
forwarding angle for the geographic forwarding.
4.1. Network model and assumptions
In this paper, we use similar assumptions used in [32].
Based on the original assumptions, we modiﬁed and supplemented several assumptions. In our model, we assume
that IEEE 802.11 broadcast DCF works under the following assumptions:
(i) All nodes have the same transmission and receiving
range R. The carrier sensing range is assumed to be the
same as the transmission range.
(ii) All nodes in the network are distributed as a twodimensional Poisson point process with density λn .
Therefore, the probability of ﬁnding i nodes in an area
of size A is given by

p(i, A) =

(λn A)i e−λn A
i!

.

(1)

(iii) Each node generates data packets according to a Poisson process of rate λp (in packets per second). The generated packets arrive at the tail of the MAC layer queue
without delay, and the arrivals at each node are statistically independent.
(iv) The packet length, L, is assumed to be the same for all
packets. The destination of each packet is randomly selected in the network.
(v) Every bit within the transmitted packets encounters
errors with a ﬁxed bit error rate BER regardless of the
distance between the transmitter and the receiver.
4.2. Probability of actual transmission
In this section, we derive the probability that a node actually transmits a packet in a certain time slot. The actual transmission probability, pt , can be represented as

pt = (1 − p0 )τ

(2)

where τ is the probability that a node transmits in a generic
slot, and p0 is the probability that there is no packet available
for transmission in the MAC layer queue of each node.
Since the CSMA scheme of geographic forwarding is
assumed to follow IEEE 802.11 broadcast scheme, the transmission probability, τ , can be determined in the same
manner as [33]. As there are no acknowledgement (ACK)
in geographic forwarding, collision cannot be detected.
Therefore contention window size does not grow. As a result,
the backoff process can be modeled as 1-D Markov chain. By
calculating the steady state probability that backoff counter
value is equal to zero, it is evident that

τ=

2
.
W0 + 1

(3)

Fig. 6. Generalized state transition diagram for broadcast.

In order to determine p0 , we employ the iterative algorithm described in [32]. The algorithm depends on the packet
arrival rate and the MAC layer service time (i.e., the time interval between the time instant when a packet starts to contend for transmission after it is located at the head of the
queue and the time instant when the packet is received by
the intended receiver). The distribution of MAC layer service
time can be modeled as a discrete probability distribution
when the smallest time unit is equal to the backoff time slot
σ , and the distribution can be obtained through the probability generating function (PGF). Knowing that each node will
decrease its backoff counter by a slot when channel is sensed
idle and will defer for a transmission time when channel is
sensed busy, the PGF of the transition for backoff counter
decremented by one slot in z-transform domain can be represented as

Hd (z) = (1 − pb )z + pb z

T +σ

(4)

σ

where T is a deferred time period, and pb is the probability
that the transmission channel for a node is busy. Therefore,
it is evident that T = L/D + DIF S + δ where D is the data rate,
and δ denotes the propagation delay. Since the probability
pb is equal to the probability that there exists at least one
neighbor node transmitting, we have
∞

pb = 1 −

(1 − (1 − p0 )τ )i

i=0

(n)i
i!

e−n = 1 − e−n(1−p0 )τ (5)

where n is equal to λn π R2 .
With those results, generalized state transition diagram
for the broadcast transmission process can be described as
Fig. 6. When a packet arrives at the head of MAC layer queue
(i.e., start), the number of backoff counters is determined.
At each state, backoff counter is decremented with transfer
function Hd (z) of Eq. (4). When the backoff counter is zero,
the packet is transmitted with transfer function SC(z). Since a
successful transmission and a collision take the same amount
of time in broadcast, it is evident that SC (z) = z L/Dσ . Here,
the exponent L/Dσ is the number of time slots needed
for transmission. In the state transition diagram, there are
multiple different paths from start to end. Each path experiences different amount of MAC layer service time. Deriving
the transfer function of the linear system depicted in Fig. 6,
the PGF, Q(z), of the steady state probability, qi , that the MAC
layer service time is equal to iσ can be expressed as
L

Q (z) =

qi zi =
i

z Dσ
W0

W0 −1

Hdi (z).

(6)

i=0

Using the properties of PGF, the expected service time can
be obtained by taking the ﬁrst order derivatives of Q(z) and

K. Kim et al. / Computer Networks 91 (2015) 1–25

9

Step 1: Initialize p0 = 0.
Step 2: Determine pb with current p0 .
s .
Step 3: Calculate service rate u = 1/Tavg
Step 4: If λP < u, p0 = 1 − λP /u; otherwise, p0 = 0.
Step 5: Stop the iteration if p0 converges with the previous
values. Otherwise, go to step 2.
Initially, the saturated condition is assumed (i.e., p0 = 0).
Using Eq. (5) and p0 , pb can be derived. We now can calculate
s by solving Eq. (7) with the obtained p . In M/G/1 queuTavg
b
ing theory, the probability that the queue is empty when λ
< μ is given by 1 − λ/μ [34]. If λ > μ, the arrival rate is
higher than the service rate, so the queue is never empty (i.e.,
p0 = 0). Based on this theory, a new p0 is calculated in step 4.
Steps 2–4 are repeated until the new p0 converges with the
previous p0 .

Fig. 7. Forwarding region and its boundary line.

putting 1 for z.
s
Tavg
=σ

iqi = σ Q (z)|z=1 .

(7)

4.3. Probability of successful transmission

i

Before applying the iteration algorithm, the packet arrival
rate should be modiﬁed. We assumed that the packet arrival
rate of each station is equal to λp . However, each node may
receive and relay additional packets that originated from others. Therefore, we deﬁne total packet arrival rate as

λP = λ p + λ p

(8)

where λp represent the arrivals of self-generated packets,
and λ p stands for the arrivals of additional packets that
should be forwarded.
λ p can be derived from forwarding angle θ f and given
packet generation rate λp . In Fig. 7, a forwarding region is illustrated with its boundary line. At each node, packets are
forwarded only if it belongs to the forwarding region of a certain source to its destination. Therefore, the probability that
a certain node will be in the forwarding region of randomly
chosen source and destination pair can be represented as

pf =

Af
An

(9)

where Af denotes the expected area of forwarding region with
respect to the distance from the source to destination, and An
is the area of entire network. It is evident that as θ f grows,
so do Af and pf . The derivation of the area of the forwarding
region and its expected value, Af , are given in Appendix A.
Now, we determine λ p using pf . As we assumed, the
packet generation at each node are statistically independent.
Moreover, under the unsaturated channel condition, a generated packet will arrive at an intermediate node within some
bounded time. Therefore, it is obvious that the arrivals of
packets to be relayed follow Poisson process with rate λ p ,
and λ p can be given as

λ p = p f Nλ p

(10)

where N is the number of nodes in the network. Since the
sum of two independent Poisson random variables with rate
λ1 and λ2 is Poisson random variable with rate λ1 + λ2 , the
total packet arrival rate can be deﬁned as Eq. (8).
Using the previous equations, p0 can be obtained through
the following iterative sequences:

Now, we determine the probability of successful transmission when a node transmits a packet to a randomly chosen neighbor node. The probability of successful transmission, ps , can be represented as

ps = p1 p2 p3

(11)

where p1 is the probability that one-hop neighbor nodes do
not affect the packet reception of the destination node, p2
denotes the probability that hidden node problem does not
occur, and p3 stands for the probability that there is no bit
error in a received packet.
First, we determine p1 . There are three possible cases for
each one-hop neighbor node when a source node transmits
a packet in a certain slot:
(i) The node does not transmit a packet in the same slot;
(ii) The node transmits a packet in the same slot, and its
transmission affects the destination node;
(iii) The node transmits a packet in the same slot, but its
transmission does not affect the destination node.
In the cases above, case 1 and case 3 have no inﬂuence
on the packet reception of destination node. To calculate the
probabilities, we should obtain the probability that a node
transmits a packet in a certain slot, and the probability that
the transmission will affect the destination node. We have
already obtained the probability of actual transmission at
Section 4.2.
The probability, peffect1 , that a transmission of certain
neighbor node will affect the randomly chosen destination
node is equal to the probability that the distance between
the transmitting neighbor node (i.e., interference node) and
destination node is less than R. This is also identical to the
probability that the destination node is located in the intersection of two circles which are centered at the interference node and the source node. Fig. 8 shows the intersection
of two transmission circles when the distance between two
centers is equal to r. As can be seen in the Fig. 8, the area of
intersection can be calculated by subtracting the area of triangle from circular sector and multiplying this area by two.
So we have

10

K. Kim et al. / Computer Networks 91 (2015) 1–25

The transmission of source node will succeed unless nodes
in potential hidden nodes area transmit packets during the
vulnerable period, and their transmissions affect destination
node. Hence, p2 can be represented as
∞

p2 =

1 − pt peffect2

N2

λ3π R2

N2 =0

= e−pt peffect2 λ3π R

Tv

σ

N2

e

N2 !

−λ3π R2

2 Tv

σ

(17)

where N2 is the number of neighbor nodes in potential hidden
node area.
Lastly, we determine p3 . Using the given BER, the probability that there is no error in a received packet can be simply
represented as
Fig. 8. Intersection of two transmission circles centered at source node and
interference node.

Ao(r) = 2 R2 cos−1

r
2R

−

r
2

R2 −

r2
4

.

(12)

Therefore, peffect1 is

peffect1

E[Ao]
=
=
π R2

1
π R2

2π
0

R
0

r
Ao(r)
drdθ .
π R2

∞

1 − pt peffect1

N1

N1

N1 !

N1 =0

= e−pt peffect1 λπ R

λπ R2

e−λπ R

(13)

2

2

(14)

where N1 is the number of neighbor nodes.
Now we determine p2 . p2 is the probability that the hidden node problem will not happen. Before we obtain p2 , we
ﬁrst deﬁne two terms: potential hidden node area and vulnerable period. The potential hidden node area is the region where
a transmission of a node may cause a hidden node problem.
Therefore, it can be deﬁned as an area between two circles,
both centered at the source node, with a radius of R and 2R.
The vulnerable period is the period that the transmission of a
node in the potential hidden node area may cause a collision at
the destination node. According to [35], this period is deﬁned
as twice of data transmission time. Therefore, the vulnerable
period, Tv , can be represented as

Tv = 2L/D

(15)

where L is the packet length, and D is the data rate.
We deﬁne peffect2 as the probability that the transmission
of a node in potential hidden node area during the vulnerable period will affect the packet reception of the destination
node. By using a similar process that was employed to obtain
peffect1 , peffect2 can be given as

peffect2 =

E[Ao]
=
π R2

2π

1

π R2

0

2R
R

Ao(r)

r
drdθ .
3π R2

(18)

Consequently, the probability of successful transmission
is given as

p s = p1 p 2 p 3
= (1 − BER)L e−λπ R

2

(

pt peffect + 3Tσv peffect
1
2

).

(19)

4.4. Packet delivery ratio

The transmission from a source node to a randomly chosen destination node will succeed unless neighbor nodes
transmit packets in the same slot and their transmissions affect the destination node. Using previously obtained results,
p1 can be expressed as

p1 =

p3 = (1 − BER)L .

(16)

We extend the analysis presented in Section 4.3 for determining the end-to-end packet delivery ratio (PDR). PDR is a
performance metric which is strongly related to the distance
between the source and its destination. In AFAR, each source
node can easily obtain the distance to the destination at each
transmission by employing the geographic information contained in multi-dimensional multi-tier address. However, in
this paper, we calculate the PDR based on the expected distance to lower the computation at each node and obtain the
generalized solution. Using the equations described in [36],
and assuming the square-shaped network with side length a,
the expected distance between two randomly chosen points
is given as

davg =

√
√
a
{2 + 2 + 5 ln (1 + 2)} ≈ 0.5214a.
15

(20)

Under the given expected distance condition, we employ
iteration method to derive PDR. The probability that a certain node eventually fails to receive the packet is equal to the
probability that all nodes in the previous hop fail to deliver
packets to the target node. In other words, a certain node will
successfully receive a packet if there exists at least a single
successful transmission from its neighbor nodes. Let Ap, d be
the area of the region where any node can forward a packet
to the node that is distance d away from the ﬁnal destination node. Assuming that all nodes in Ap, d of a certain node
have the same successful packet reception probability from
the previous hop, the PDR is given by

Pr,n = 1 − (1 − ps )λn A p,R(NR −n) Pr,n−1 ,
f or n = 1, 2, . . . , NR

(21)

where λn is the node density of the network,

NR = davg /R , Pr,1 = ps , and
Pr,NR = end-to-end PDR.

(22)

K. Kim et al. / Computer Networks 91 (2015) 1–25

11

Fig. 9. Variations of Ap, d when θ f = 2π /3.
Fig. 10. Packet delivery ratio as forwarding angle increases.

In the equation above, Pr, n is the probability that a node
located at distance nR away from the source node has received the packet successfully. In the exponent of Eq. (21),
λn A p,R(NR −n) represents the average number of nodes which
could forward a packet to the node of current stage, and Pr,n−1
stands for the probability that the nodes in A p,R(NR −n) had
successfully received the packets at previous step. Therefore,
the exponent itself implies the number of nodes that were
able to transmit a packet to their own forwarding region.
To determine PDR with Eq. (21), Ap, d should be derived.
Fig. 9 illustrates Ap, d when the forwarding angle is 2π /3. As
can be seen in the ﬁgure, Ap, d is highly dependent on the distance from the designated node to the destination. Using geometry, Ap, d can be obtained as follows (see Appendix B for
details):

A p,d =

⎧
⎪
⎪
π R2 − π
⎪
⎪
⎨

2
d
2 sin α

⎪
⎪
⎪
β R2 − (π − 2γ )
⎪
⎩

− 2R2 α − d

2
d
2 sin α

−

d 2
2

2
d
2 sin α

2
d
2 sin α

−

R 2
2

if R sin α ≥ d ≥ 0
+R

if d ≥ R sin α

(23)
where

α=

θf
2

,

β =α+

π
2

− cos−1

R sin α
,
d

γ = cos−1

R sin α
.
d
(24)

4.5. Numerical results
In this section we determine the reasonable forwarding
angle through the MATLAB simulation. We have obtained relationships among PDR and network parameters in previous
subsections. We ﬁgure out optimal forwarding angles under
the various network conditions using those results.
Fig. 10 shows the graph of PDR versus forwarding angle
when network parameters are given as Table 2. When forwarding angle is less than 115° , PDR rises as the angle increases. This is because the increase of forwarding angle let
forwarding region be wider and makes more nodes participate in the packet delivery process. However, after the apex
of the given curve, the PDR starts to decrease. As can be seen
in Appendix A, as forwarding angle gets larger, the area of

Table 2
Simulation parameters.
Parameter

Value

Network size
Node density, λn
Transmission range, R
Packet size, L
Data rate, D
Contention window size, W0
Packet generation rate, λp
Slot time, σ
DIFS
BER

400 m × 400 m
0.0023/m2
30 m
2300 bits
11 Mbps
32
2/s
20 us
50 us
10−4

entire forwarding region sharply increases. According to the
Eq. (10), this leads to an upsurge in total packet arrival rate. As
a result, the channel becomes saturated, and PDR drops dramatically. Consequently, the optimal forwarding angle in this
scenario is 115° where PDR is 0.956. Since the graph shows a
gradual slope at near its apex, the determined angle can be
said to be stable.
Now we perform the simulation under varying network
conditions to obtain acceptable forwarding angle. In some
cases, it is impossible to deﬁne network parameters as constant values. For those cases, appropriate level of default forwarding angle should be provided so that nodes can communicate with each other with reasonable PDR. We obtain acceptable forwarding angle for the network depicted in Table 2.
Fig. 11 shows the simulation results under various network
environments. The x-axis in the ﬁgure represents the type
of changed parameter with compared to the default network
condition as shown in Table 2. Each change is independent of
the others. The speciﬁc value of a parameter is marked under each column line. The X mark represents the optimal forwarding angle at the given condition, and each vertical line
stands for a range of acceptable forwarding angle. We deﬁne
the acceptable forwarding angle as an angle at which difference between its PDR and optimal PDR is less than 3%. As can
be seen in the ﬁgure, although there are differences in their
optimal forwarding angles, acceptable forwarding angles have
range of 105–123° as in common. Therefore, nodes in the
network can employ 105–123° as their forwarding angle

12

K. Kim et al. / Computer Networks 91 (2015) 1–25

AODV w/o noise
OLSR w/o noise
AFAR w/o noise
Flooding w/o noise

AODV w/ noise
OLSR w/noise
AFAR w/noise
Flooding w/ noise

1

Packet delivery ratio

0.9
0.8
0.7
0.6
0.5
0.4
0.3
0.2
0.1
Fig. 11. Forwarding angle ranges under various network environments.

0

1

2

5.5
Data rate (Mbps)

11

when network parameters vary as depicted in this simulation.

Fig. 12. Comparison of PDR among AODV, OLSR, AFAR, and ﬂooding in a
normal environment and a smart grid environment as data rate increases.

5. Performance evaluations

energy consumption is the average energy dissipated in a single node during the simulation. The energy model is based on
the First Order Radio Model proposed in [37], which is widely
used for measuring energy consumption in wireless communications [38,39]. In this model, the energy consumption for
transmitting 1 bit over distance d is

In this section, we evaluate the performance of AFAR. This
section can be divided into two major sections. In Section 5.1,
we evaluate the performance of AFAR under different network scenarios using OPNET simulator. In Section 5.2, we
evaluate the performance of the proposed framework under
the speciﬁc smart grid application scenario by co-simulating
OPNET and OpenDSS.
5.1. Framework validation
In this section, we validate the suitability of AFAR for
smart grid applications. The performances of AFAR are compared with that of two categories of routing protocols:
broadcast-based and unicast-based. We chose simple ﬂooding for the broadcast based routing protocol. For the unicast
routing protocols, AODV and OLSR were selected. AODV is a
typical reactive routing protocol [22], and OLSR is a representative proactive routing protocol which has superior scalability [21].
5.1.1. Conﬁguration
Before we proceed to present simulation results, we ﬁrst
explain simulation scenarios and network conﬁgurations.
Four different scenarios were employed for our simulation. The ﬁrst scenario was designed to evaluate PDR, endto-end delay, the number of transmissions, and the average
energy consumption under various levels of wireless interferences. In the second scenario, the same metrics were analyzed when the network size increases. In the third scenario,
the performance of AFAR was analyzed when nodes are mobile. In the last scenario, we analyzed the performance of
extension framework components, i.e., network-level caching
and geographic-multicast, in terms of the average number of
transmissions.
The number of transmissions denotes the total number of
packets that were transmitted into the network. It includes
not only data packets but also control messages. The average

ET x = Eelec +

amp

∗ d2

(25)

where Eelec is the energy spent by transmitter or receiver circuit and amp stands for the energy dissipated in transmit
ampliﬁer. The energy used to receive 1 bit data is

ERx = Eelec .

(26)

For all scenarios, Eelec was set to 50 nJ/bit, and amp was set
to 100 pJ/bit/m2 as many other research [37,38,40,41].
We implemented the proposed framework in the OPNET modeler 14.5 simulator. For the underlying physical and
MAC layer protocol, IEEE 802.11b MAC/PHY were used. IEEE
802.11b supports four PHY rates from 1 Mbps to 11 Mbps in
the 2.4 GHz band. In indoor environment, its data rates can
reach up to 11 Mbps. In outdoor environment, 1 Mbps of data
rate is preferred to provide longer transmission range and
robustness [42]. Many researches have proved that 1 Mbps
shows better robustness than 11 Mbps especially when the
wireless link is unreliable [43–45]. We conducted a similar
simulation study to determine appropriate data rate for our
evaluation. Fig. 12 compares PDR of all protocols in a normal environment and a smart grid environment (i.e., underground transformer vault condition depicted in [13]). Eightyone nodes were uniformly distributed in 450 m × 450 m
square shaped network and the packet generation at each
node followed the Poisson distribution with an arrival rate of
1 pkt/s. The maximum transmission range of each node was
set to 100 m. In a normal environment, PDR remains almost
constant when data rates are 1 Mbps, 2 Mbps, and 5.5 Mbps
and slightly decreases when the data rate is 11 Mbps. However, we could observe that PDR of all protocols drops signiﬁcantly as the data rate increases in a smart grid environment.
When the data rate is 11 Mbps, almost all packets were lost.

K. Kim et al. / Computer Networks 91 (2015) 1–25

as 800 bits including the header. In smart grid, response time
limit and update interval are different from application to application. However, update intervals are usually longer than
2 s except for phasor measurement units (PMUs) which belong to wide area networks (WAN) [46]. For this reason, we
assumed that the packet generation at each node follows the
Poisson distribution with the arrival rate of 0.5 pkt/s. To provide further performance information, additional set of simulations using arrival rates of 1 pkt/s and 1.5 pkt/s were conducted. In each simulation, forwarding angle was determined
using the methods described in Section 4. Each simulation
run lasted for 300 s.

0.11

Average end−to−end delay (sec)

0.1
0.09
0.08
0.07
0.06
0.05
0.04
0.03
0.02
1500

13

2000

2500 3000 3500 4000 4500
Number of RREQ messages sent

5000

5500

Fig. 13. The average end-to-end delay versus the number of RREQ messages
sent.

Therefore, for our evaluation studies, we used a data rate of
1 Mbps which shows fair performance even in a smart grid
environment.
As for the AODV and OLSR protocols, manet_station node
model was used. In AODV, active route timeout (ART) can signiﬁcantly affect the performance of the network. Each node
stores route information for ART period in its cache and does
not issue route request (RREQ) messages for the valid routes.
In other words, longer ART may reduce the number of RREQ
messages sent, so routing overhead can be reduced. Fig. 13
shows the relation between the number of RREQ messages
sent and the average end-to-end delay we obtained through
the simulation. It is evident that both parameters are strongly
correlated, which means that choosing reasonable ART value
is very important. In OPNET, default ART value is 3 s. In static
network, route information does not change often so default
ART value can produce unnecessarily large amount of routing overhead. Through the simulation, we could observe that
AODV shows favorable performance when ART is set to larger
than 15 s. Therefore, we used ART of 15 s for our simulation
studies.
Throughout the simulations, the maximum transmission
range of each node was limited to 100 m, and network size
was varied on each scenario. The data packet size was ﬁxed

5.1.2. Performance of AFAR in unreliable wireless link
conditions
In this section, we evaluate the performance of AFAR under unreliable wireless link conditions. Eighty-one nodes
were uniformly distributed in 450 m × 450 m square shaped
network. Every node transmitted packets to the sink node located at near the top-right corner of the network.
As discussed in [6,13,14], the wireless link status in smart
grid environments is extremely unreliable due to the electromagnetic radiation generated by electronic devices. We
reﬂected the inﬂuence of the electromagnetic interference
by modifying OPNET radio link transceiver pipelines. In OPNET
dra_bkgnoise.ps.c, the default background noise value is deﬁned as −100.56 dBm. We added a Gaussian random variable
with mean μ and standard deviation σ as additional interference. For example, if interference of 8 dB is added, new noise
level is −92.56 dBm. The worst case discussed in [13] is the
main power room environment. In this case, μ is 12 and σ is
3.29. We changed the values within the range.
Packet delivery ratio: Fig. 14 compares PDR obtained
from AFAR, ﬂooding, AODV, and OLSR when we increased the
noise level by altering μ and σ . When the packet generation
rate is 0.5 pkt/s (Fig. 14(a)) and there is no additional interference (i.e., μ = 0, σ = 0), all protocols present excellent PDR
performances. However, as the average noise level and standard deviation increase, AFAR outperforms all other protocols. Especially, when μ = 8 and σ = 3.19 (i.e., underground
transformer vault condition (NLOS) depicted in [13]), PDR
of AFAR is 84.9%, and it is only 11.9% lower than that of the
default case. However, ﬂooding, AODV, and OLSR show PDR
of 63.7%, 71.1%, and 65.1% respectively, and these values are

Fig. 14. Comparison of PDR among AODV, OLSR, ﬂooding, and AFAR under different packet generation rates and several noise conditions.

14

K. Kim et al. / Computer Networks 91 (2015) 1–25

Fig. 15. Comparison of the average end-to-end delay among AODV, OLSR, ﬂooding, and AFAR under different packet generation rates and several noise conditions.

33.6%, 26.9% and 33.5% lower than that of the normal case.
When the noise level gets even higher (μ = 12, σ = 3.29, i.e.,
main power room condition [13]), most of packets are lost in
ﬂooding, AODV, and OLSR. In contrast, AFAR still shows 54%
of PDR. In our simulation, the measured BER between two
diagonally located nodes was approximately 0.001584 when
μ = 12 and σ = 0. In this case, the probability that a single
packet is successfully delivered to the next hop is only 28.13%
(using (1 − BER)L ). AFAR presents more than 54% of PDR even
in such a severe link condition. Although ﬂooding algorithm
also has multiple paths to the destination, its large amount of
duplicated packets may act as additional interference. When
background noise level is low, the interference does not affect much on PDR; however, when background noise level
becomes high, slight increase of noise level may signiﬁcantly
inﬂuence the PDR. In case of AFAR, this phenomenon can be
avoided since forwarding angle prevents any nodes from forwarding unnecessary messages.
Similar results could be observed when the packet generation rate is 1 pkt/s (Fig. 14(b)) or 1.5 pkt/s (Fig. 14(c)). When
there is no additional interference, OLSR and AODV show better PDR performance than other protocols. In this case, the
packet error rate is low, so routes in OLSR and AODV rarely
fail. Therefore, data packets can be successfully delivered to
the destination node with low routing overhead. However, as
the noise level increases, PDR of OLSR and AODV is sharply
reduced, and AFAR shows better PDR performance than other
protocols. In smart grid environments (i.e. (μ = 8, σ = 3.19)
and (μ = 12, σ = 3.29)), PDR of AFAR is always higher than
that of other protocols.
The PDR value can be enhanced by modifying PHY layer
conﬁgurations, such as modulation scheme, data rate, and
transmission power. As can be seen in the previous results,
it is evident that AFAR can meet the desired PDR with lower
PHY overheads than the others in smart grid environments.
Average end-to-end delay: In smart grid communications, short and bounded delay is another important requirement for smart grid applications. Fig. 15 presents the average end-to-end delay of four protocols using logarithmic
scale on the y-axis. As can be seen in the ﬁgure, AFAR shows
the lowest average delay in almost all cases. As discussed in
Section 5.1.1, routing overhead and delay are strongly correlated. When there is no additional interference (i.e., μ =

0, σ = 0), routes in OLSR are stable, so the amount of routing
traﬃc is small. However, as the noise level and standard deviation increase, routes are often broken so additional routing
messages should be transmitted. This leads to the increase in
average end-to-end delay. When the noise level is very high,
the average end-to-end delay of OLSR is lowered. This phenomenon can be explained by the results of Fig. 14. As can be
observed in Fig. 14, PDR of OLSR is extremely low when the
noise level is high. In this case, most of the packets generated
from the nodes at the far distance fail to reach the sink node.
Thus, the average end-to-end delay is lowered.
In case of AODV, the average end-to-end delay signiﬁcantly increases as the noise level rises. As mentioned in
Section 5.1.1, AODV does not issue new RREQ messages for
valid routes stored in node’s cache. However, in smart grid,
wireless channel conditions are extremely dynamic so route
information is often invalid. Therefore, each node has to
transmit a new RREQ message for every newly generated
packet, which leads to the signiﬁcant increase in delay. To
prove this, we measured the number of RREQ messages sent
when (μ = 0, σ = 0) and (μ = 8, σ = 3.19) while increasing ART from 1 s to 15 s. When there is no additional noise,
the number of RREQ messages sent when ART is 1 s was 2.57
times larger than that of when ART is 15 s. However, when
μ = 8 and σ = 3.19, only 27% of additional RREQ messages
were sent. This result can explain the signiﬁcant amount of
end-to-end delay of AODV in smart grid environments.
The average end-to-end delay of AFAR and ﬂooding also
slightly increases as the noise level rises. This is due to the increase in carrier sensing delay. In CSMA/CA, each node senses
the channel before it transmits a packet. If the sensed energy
level is higher than the predeﬁned threshold value, the node
does not transmit. When there is additional noise, the background noise level is closer to the threshold value than that
of the normal condition. In this case, even slight increase of
energy can make nodes sense the channel as busy, so each
packet transmission affects nodes in a wider network area. In
case of AFAR, since forwarding angle prevents nodes from forwarding unnecessary messages, it shows lower average endto-end delay than ﬂooding.
Average energy consumption: In WSN, energy eﬃciency
of a routing protocol is a very important issue. Fig. 16
presents the average energy consumption of a single node in

K. Kim et al. / Computer Networks 91 (2015) 1–25

15

Fig. 16. Comparison of the average energy consumption among AODV, OLSR, ﬂooding, and AFAR under different packet generation rates and several noise
conditions.

Fig. 17. Comparison of PDR among AODV, OLSR, ﬂooding, and AFAR under different packet generation rates and various network sizes.

each protocol for 300 s. We can observe than AFAR consumes
less energy than other protocols. The reason for the decrease
in the average energy consumption along with the increase
in noise level is due to the lowered PDR. When a noise level
is high, a number of packets are lost, so the number of forwarding is decreased.
The important outcome in this set of simulation is that
AFAR is a signiﬁcantly more robust and energy-eﬃcient routing protocol with lower end-to-end delay than other unicast
based ad-hoc routing protocols, so that it is more suitable for
smart grid applications.
5.1.3. Performance of AFAR in various network size conditions
In this set of simulations, we evaluate the performance of
AFAR in various network size conditions. The purpose of this
simulation is to verify the general performance and the scalability of AFAR. The network is square shaped and four sizes
2
2
2
2
were selected: 0.16 km , 0.25 km , 0.36 km , and 0.64 km .
2
The node density was ﬁxed as 400/km . The destination was
randomly chosen in the network at each new packet generation. As for the noise model, default noise model was used.
We compare AFAR, ﬂooding, AODV, and OLSR in terms of PDR,
end-to-end delay, the number of packet transmissions, and
the average energy consumption.
Packet delivery ratio: Fig. 17 compares PDR obtained
from ﬂooding, AODV, OLSR, and AFAR when we increased the
network size. While the PDR of AODV and ﬂooding sharply

drops as the network size increases, AFAR shows relatively
constant PDR. In case of the ﬂooding and AODV, a large number of duplications of data packets and control packets cause
severe collisions and lower the PDR. As the network size increases, the number of possible destination nodes also increases. Therefore, the probability that valid route information already exists in route cache is lowered so more RREQ
messages are transmitted. This explains signiﬁcant PDR decline in AODV. OLSR usually shows better PDR performances
than AFAR. However, when the packet generation rate is 0.5
pkt/s or 1 pkt/s, AFAR shows better performance than OLSR
when the network size is 0.64 km2 . Even when the packet
generation rate is 1.5 pkt/s, the amount of decrease in PDR
is smaller than that of OLSR. Knowing that OLSR is a representative ad-hoc routing protocol superior in scalability, this
result implies that geographic forwarding of AFAR is scalable.
Moreover, considering the results of Section 5.1.2, it is evident that the high PDR performance results of OLSR in Fig. 17
are only valid when the channel is stable.
Average end-to-end delay: Fig. 18 presents average endto-end delay of four protocols using logarithmic scale on the
y-axis. As can be seen in the ﬁgure, AFAR has the shortest delay compared to the other protocols in all cases. AODV shows
the worst performance due to the large routing overhead. Although AODV does not issue new RREQ message for valid
routes in its cache, the probability that routes in cache are
utilized is lowered as the network size increases. Therefore,

16

K. Kim et al. / Computer Networks 91 (2015) 1–25

Fig. 18. Comparison of the average end-to-end delay among AODV, OLSR, ﬂooding, and AFAR under different packet generation rates and various network sizes.

2

1

0.8

CDF

0.6

0.4
AODV
AFAR
OLSR
Flooding

0.2

0
0

0.01

0.02
0.03
End−to−end delay (sec)

0.04
2

Fig. 19. CDF of the end-to-end delay when the network size is 0.25 km and
the packet generation rate is 1 pkt/s.

wireless medium is saturated, which prevents data packets
to be transmitted to the wireless medium. Flooding and OLSR
also present exponential increases in average end-to-end de2
lay. When the network size is 0.64 km and the packet generation rate is 1 pkt/s, the average end-to-end delay of OLSR
is 5.69 times larger than that of network size of 0.36 km2 .
In contrast, the average end-to-end delay of AFAR only increased by 1.53 times. It is evident that AFAR has better scalability in terms of average end-to-end delay compared to the
other protocols.
For smart grid applications, not only the short average
end-to-end delay, but also the delay-constraint is an important communication requirement. Fig. 19 presents the CDF of
end-to-end delay when the network size is 0.25 km2 and the
packet generation rate is 1 pkt/s. In case of AFAR, all packets
are delivered within 0.0237 s. However, other protocols show
long-tailed or heavy-tailed end-to-end delay distribution.
Number of transmissions: Fig. 20 compares the number
of transmissions obtained from ﬂooding, AODV, OLSR, and
AFAR under given network sizes. Although AFAR is a ﬂooding based routing protocol, its number of transmissions is the
lowest among all protocols when network size is bigger than

0.16 km . This is because the forwarding angle effectively limits the forwarding region so that the transmission of unnecessary messages can be prevented. OLSR has a small number of
transmissions when network size is small, however, as network size increases, its value rapidly increases. The number
of transmissions of ﬂooding, AODV, and OLSR when network
size is 0.64 km2 are 6.64, 4.39, and 2.54 times larger than that
of AFAR when the packet generation rate is 1 pkt/s, 4.40, 2.71,
and 1.72 times larger when the packet generation rate is 1
pkt/s, and 3.36, 2.18, and 1.53 times larger when the packet
generation rate is 1.5 pkt/s,
Average energy consumption: Lastly, we examine the
average energy consumption. Energy eﬃciency of a routing
protocol is very important issue especially when it is applied
to the wireless sensor networks. Fig. 21 presents the average energy consumption of a single node in each protocol for
300 s. We can see that AFAR always consumes less energy
than the others except when the packet generation rate is 1.5
pkt/s and the network size is 0.16 km2 . However, considering
the results of Fig. 14, it is evident that AFAR will consume less
energy than OLSR for delivering the same amount of data in
smart grid environments.
5.1.4. Performance of AFAR when nodes are mobile
In HAN and WSN, nodes are often mobile. Therefore, AFAR
is required to provide good performance even in a mobile environment. In this section, we evaluate the performance of
AFAR and other protocols when nodes are mobile. The network conﬁguration was identical with that of Section 5.1.2. As
for the mobility model, random waypoint model [47] of OPNET simulator was applied to all nodes except the sink node.
In this model, each node selects a random destination location in the network. Then, it selects a random speed from the
uniform distribution of 0 to vmax , and moves to the destination. After reaching the destination, it pauses for pause time
period. After the period, it selects a random destination and
a random speed again, and starts to move to the new destination. In our simulation, pause time was set to 0 s, which
corresponds to continuous mobility. We increased vmax from
5 m/s to 20 m/s, and observed PDR, the average end-to-end
delay, and the average energy consumption in a normal environment and a smart grid environment. As for the smart
grid environment, underground transformer vault condition

K. Kim et al. / Computer Networks 91 (2015) 1–25

17

Fig. 20. Comparison of the number of transmissions among AODV, OLSR, ﬂooding, and AFAR under different packet generation rates and various network sizes.

Fig. 21. Comparison of the average energy consumption among AODV, OLSR, ﬂooding, and AFAR under different packet generation rates and various network
sizes.

(NLOS) depicted in [13] was applied. The packet generation
rate was set to 0.5 pkt/s, which is the largest update rate
of typical smart grid applications [46]. We reduced ART of
AODV to the default value (i.e., 3 s).
Fig. 22 compares the performance of AFAR with that of
other protocols while increasing vmax in a normal environment. As can be seen in Fig. 22(a), AODV and OLSR show
worse performance than the result of Fig. 14(a). When nodes
are mobile, a network conﬁguration is frequently changed,
so cached route information can be only valid for a short period. Therefore, in case of AODV, RREQ messages should be
sent more frequently, which causes increase of the packet
collision probability. Also, the established route may become
invalid during the message delivery process due to the mobility of intermediate nodes. As a result, PDR is lowered.
Likewise, in OLSR, a node should continuously update its
route table, which takes a large amount of time to be stabilized. On the other hand, AFAR and ﬂooding do not establish any prior route before data packet transmissions, so
they show good performance. Fig. 22(b) presents the average
end-to-end delay in a normal environment. Although both
ﬂooding and AFAR present similar PDR performance, AFAR
surpasses ﬂooding in terms of the average end-to-end delay. Due to the increased routing overhead, AODV and OLSR
show worse performance than that of Fig. 15(a). The results
for the average energy consumption is shown in Fig. 22(c).
It is evident that AFAR consumes less energy than other
protocols.

Fig. 23 presents the simulation results from the smart
grid environment. As can be seen in Fig. 23(a), PDR of ﬂooding, AODV, and OLSR is even much lower than the results of
Fig. 22(a). However, AFAR still shows good PDR performance
even in the smart grid environment. This result can be validated by the results of Fig. 14(a). The results of Fig. 23(b) and
(c) also sustain the suitability of AFAR for smart grid applications having mobility.
5.1.5. Performance of AFAR in network-level caching and
geographic multicast scenario
In this section, we evaluate the performance of networklevel caching and geographic multicast of extension framework.
In our scenario, we assume that 256 nodes are uniformly deployed in a square network with side length of 800 m. The
control center, which is located at the center of the network,
sends request messages to all nodes in the speciﬁc region
where its ﬁrst and second tier geographic addresses are both
‘01’. Therefore, 16 nodes receive the request message from
the control center. After receiving the message, each node
replies to the control center. In this scenario, a node in the
middle of the given region can act as a caching node. When
network-level caching is activated, caching node collects data
from neighbor nodes, aggregates the data, and sends the result to the control center. Likewise, the control center can
send packets to the target nodes using geographic multicast.
We compared the average number of transmissions of
four cases: when both network-level caching and geographic

18

K. Kim et al. / Computer Networks 91 (2015) 1–25

Fig. 22. PDR, the average end-to-end delay, and the average energy consumption versus mobility in a normal environment.

Fig. 23. PDR, the average end-to-end delay, and the average energy consumption versus mobility in a smart grid environment.

signiﬁcantly reduces the average number of transmissions in
the network. When both network-level caching and geographic
multicast are all enabled, the number of transmissions is only
13.7% of the default case (i.e., when both schemes are disabled).
5.2. Evaluation in smart grid

Fig. 24. Comparison of the average number of transmissions according to
the applications of network-level caching and geographic multicast.

multicast are not applied, when only network-level caching
is enabled, when only geographic multicast is enabled, and
when both schemes are all enabled. The average number
of transmissions was obtained by dividing the total number of transmissions occurred during the simulation by the
number of request–reply sequences. Therefore, the low average number of transmissions implies that the control center
can receive reply messages from target nodes with the small
number of packet transmissions occurred in the network. As
can be seen in the Fig. 24, the application of each scheme

In this section, we simulate AFAR under the speciﬁc smart
grid application scenario. We deﬁned a simple energy management (EM) scenario in power distribution system with
deployment of a renewable energy source. In our simulation,
OOCoSim [48], which is designed to co-simulate an electrical
distribution system and a network system in a smart grid scenario, was employed. The rest of the section is organized as
follows. In Section 5.2.1, we brieﬂy explain how OOCoSim operates. And then, we deﬁne the simulation model and smart
grid application in Section 5.2.2. Finally, the simulation results are provided in Section 5.2.3.
5.2.1. OOCoSim
OOCoSim consists of OPNET, OpenDSS, and CoSim module.
OPNET is a widely used GUI based commercial network simulator. One of the important features of OPNET is that it can
communicate with an external program via External Service
Module (ESM) and External Interface(EI). In OOCosim, OPNET receives query message through EI from Cosim module,
performs network simulation, and returns the results to the

K. Kim et al. / Computer Networks 91 (2015) 1–25

799

CoSim module. OpenDSS is a script based simulator used for
power distribution system simulation. OpenDSS can be invoked by and exchange messages with external program via
COM interface. When OpenDSS receives any query message
from the CoSim module through COM interface, it simulates
a distribution system under the given conditions, and returns
the results to the CoSim module. The CoSim module is the
C++ language based application which activates both simulators and collects the simulation results. Smart grid application is also implemented in the CoSim module. Under the deﬁned smart grid application scenario, CoSim module invokes
the simulators, receives the result messages, and sends the
results to the smart grid application. The smart grid application can obtain its target results using the received messages.

722

712

701

742
705
729 744

727

713

704

702

707
720

714

703

724

706

718

725

728
730
732
736
710

708

709

733

731

775

734

735

737

740
738

711

741

Fig. 25. IEEE 37 node test feeder.

2000

Solar power (kW)

5.2.2. Simulation model
As renewable energy technologies evolve, distributed energy resources (DER) are becoming some of the key components in distribution system. By deploying a distributed
generation (DG) in electrical grid, electricity transportation
losses on power lines can be signiﬁcantly reduced and voltage proﬁle can be improved [49]. Therefore, high-quality energy can be provided to customers at reasonable price. In our
simulation, a solar photovoltaic (PV) system is deployed in
the distribution domain as DG. However, in a solar PV system, cloud shadows that pass across solar panels cause sudden drops in energy output. Those phenomena are known as
cloud transient or solar ramping [50–52] and cause signiﬁcant
inﬂuence on voltage proﬁle and system reliability. In order to
solve this problem, distributed storage (DS) units and energy
management (EM) system are deployed in the distribution
domain [53]. In this section, we describe simulation model
according to the three categories: (i) power system; (ii) smart
grid application, (iii) network system.
Power system: The IEEE distribution system analysis subcommittee published radial distribution test feeder data to
provide a benchmark test feeder so that different software
evaluation results can be compared. We employed IEEE 37
node test feeder system [54]. IEEE 37 node test feeder is
an actual feeder located in California. It operates at nominal voltage of 4.8 kV, all line segments are at underground,
and the loads are very unbalanced. The layout of the feeder
is shown in Fig. 25. The external power source supply energy
through the substation transformer located at bus 799. The
transformer converts voltage of 230 kV into 4.8 kV.
In our scenario, a solar PV system was deployed as DG
units to reduce electrical power losses and improve voltage
proﬁle. Since the loads are very unbalanced in IEEE 37 node
test feeder, location and energy output of DG signiﬁcantly affect the eﬃciency of entire distribution system. Hence, methods described in [55] were employed to determine optimal
size and location of the solar PV system. The solar PV system
was deployed at bus 730, and its average energy generation
at normal state was set to 2017 kW. We applied solar ramping event in our power generation scenario, and the detailed
generator output proﬁle for 5 min is presented in Fig. 26.
The DS unit was installed at each bus to compensate for
impact of temporal solar ramping event. If power outputs of
PV units were drastically lowered, DS units were dispatched
as a supplemental energy source. DS units were charged
when the irradiance level was normal.

19

1500

1000

500

0
0

50

100

150
Time (sec)

200

250

300

Fig. 26. The time-varying power output of the solar generator in bus 730.

Smart grid application: At each bus, EM module was deployed with EM application to improve stability of the entire
distribution system. Two types of EM module are deﬁned in
our scenario: a central energy management (CEM) module
and a distributed energy management (DEM) module. The
CEM module is deployed at the substation (i.e., bus 799) and
controls load-level of entire distribution system including DS
units. The DEM module is installed at each bus and schedules loads of the bus by monitoring an energy consumption
of customers.

20

K. Kim et al. / Computer Networks 91 (2015) 1–25

Every second, the solar PV system reports its energy generation, Psolar (t ), to the CEM module through the wired link.
Also, each DEM unit measures the load of the bus, Ld, i (t), and
sends load request message to the CEM every second. When
the message is arrived, CEM module generates a load proﬁle of next time slot for the requesting bus. The load proﬁle for bus i contains two types of information. One is the
amount of energy that can be provided by the solar PV system, L pv,i (t + 1), and the other is the amount of energy that
bus i can utilize from its nearby DS, Lds,i (t + 1). L pv,i (t + 1)
is related to the load of the entire distribution system and
power outputs of solar PV system, and can be determined
through following equation:

L pv,i (t + 1) =

Ld,i (t )
Psolar (t ).
k Ld,k (t )

(27)

For example, if the output of the solar PV generator is decreased by 10% with compared to the previous time slot due
to the cloud shadows, CEM module allocates 10% less energy
from the solar PV generator to each bus. If request messages
from some busses are lost, the latest successfully received
load information of those busses is used for the denominator calculation. In our scenario, we assumed that energy consumption of each bus is ﬁxed as a given default value (i.e.,
Ld (t ) = Ld (0)). Lds,i (t + 1) is determined by Ld,i (t ) − L pv,i (t +
1). If Lds,i (t + 1) > 0, this implies that power outputs of PV
system is lower than the energy demand of bus i. In this case,
if remaining energy of DS is larger than Lds,i (t + 1), CEM allows bus i to utilize Lds,i (t + 1) of energy from DS. If not, using
DS is not allowed. If Lds,i (t + 1) < 0, energy of Lc (t ) − Ld (t ) is
used for charging the DS. In our scenario, we assumed that
all DSs have enough energy for supplying power for busses
during solar ramping events of Fig. 26.
After processing, the result is delivered to the DEM unit
via load reply messages. At each bus in every time slot, DEM
module allocates load of Lpv, i (t) obtained from the reply message of previous time slot to the solar PV system and Lds, i (t)
to the DS. If actual load of the current time slot is larger than
Lpv, i (t), Ld,i (t ) − L pv,i (t ) of energy is supplied by the external
energy source located at bus 799, which causes larger losses
than the solar PV system. When DEM module fails to receive
a load reply message within 1 s, it is impossible for DEM unit
to determine its load schedule. In this case, DS cannot be
dispatched, so external energy source connected to bus 799
compensates for lack of solar PV power, and the power loss
increases.
Network system: We implemented network system with
OPNET modeler 14.5. In our scenario, all EM modules communicate with each other through the wireless medium.
By considering the actual coordinates of buses, the network
topology can be conﬁgured as Fig. 27. Every node in the network was assumed to have maximum transmission range of
450 m. As presented in the Fig. 27, repeater nodes were deployed to cover the lack of transmission range. We assumed
that communication between the PV system and CEM module is reliable, so there are no packet loss and delay.
In addition, we modiﬁed wireless channel model to ﬁt
smart grid environments. In this study, we used radio propagation model provided in [13]. According to the log-normal
shadowing path loss model, the signal to noise ratio (SNR) at a

Fig. 27. The network topology of IEEE 37 node test feeder.

distance d from the transmitter is given as

SNRdb = Pt − PL(d0 ) − 10η log10

d
d0

− Xσ − Pn

(28)

where Pt is transmit power in dBm, PL(d0 ) is the path loss at
the reference distance d0 , η is the path-loss exponent, Xσ is a
zero mean normal random variable with standard deviation
σ , and Pn is the noise power in dBm. These parameters were
set to different values according to the type of the EM module. Since the CEM module was deployed in the substation,
σ was set to 2.95, and Pn was set to −93 dBm [13]. For DEM
modules, underground transformer vault model was applied.
Although DEM modules were installed above the ground, we
assumed that the noise level due to the transformer operation is similar in both cases. Therefore, σ was 3.19, and Pn
was −92 dBm [13]. The path loss exponent η was set to the
value of a non-smart grid environment (i.e., η = 1.4) since the
radio wave propagates most of their time thorough the normal urban environments. These models were implemented
by modifying OPNET radio link transceiver pipelines.
Three types of communication protocols were compared: AODV, OLSR, and AFAR. For the AODV and OLSR,
manet_station node model of OPNET was used, and the
parameters were set to the default values. Underlying

K. Kim et al. / Computer Networks 91 (2015) 1–25

21

Table 3
The average power loss of entire distribution system
and voltage deviation of bus 736 during cloud transients.
Type

Loss (kW)

Voltage deviation (p.u.)

W/O EM
Optimal
AFAR
AODV
OLSR

35.32
17.77
18.90
27.81
22.73

0.0314
0.0045
0.0043
0.0172
0.0082

40

Fig. 28. The power loss of the distribution system. (For interpretation of the
references to colour in the text, the reader is referred to the web version of
this article.)

MAC/PHY protocol was IEEE 802.11b, and the data rate was
set to 1 Mbps. The data packet length was 700 bits including
the header.

Loss (kW)

35

30

25

20

5.2.3. Simulation results
The main objective of the co-simulation is to verify
whether AFAR is suitable for smart grid applications. In this
section, by comparing the simulation results of AFAR with
those of other protocols and optimal case, we show that AFAR
is suitable communication framework for smart grid applications. The results are evaluated in terms of system power loss
and voltage proﬁle.
Evaluation with respect to power loss: The power loss
of distribution system is composed of line losses and transformer losses. As mentioned in Section 5.2.2, deployment of
solar PV system as a DER can signiﬁcantly lower the power
loss since the electricity transmission distance get shorter.
However, when cloud passes over the solar panels, the output power drops signiﬁcantly, and let buses draw an energy
from the external power source located at bus 799. As a result, total power loss increases. In our scenario, EM modules
and DS were deployed to deal with this problem.
Fig. 28 presents the power loss of the distribution system
under the various communication protocol conditions. The
blue line without any mark on it shows the results of optimal EM operation. The word optimal implies that there is neither packet loss nor transmission delay between CEM module and DEM modules. On the other hand, purple line with
inverted triangle represents the case when DS units and EM
system are not used at all. Signiﬁcant differences in power
loss between two cases can be observed especially when
solar ramping events happen (i.e., 50–130 s and 170–230 s).
When EM scheme is not applied, the power loss greatly increases since each bus draws insuﬃcient power from external energy source. In contrast, power loss is signiﬁcantly reduced in the optimal case because DS unit temporarily supplies power to its belonging bus. This results indicate that our
EM scenario can signiﬁcantly lower the power loss of an entire distribution system when solar ramping effect occurs.
When communications among EM units are imperfect,
desired EM operations cannot be achieved. An orange line

15
0

0.2

0.4

0.6

0.8

1

PDR
Fig. 29. The power loss versus PDR.

with square marks on it represents a system power loss when
EM units communicate with each other through AODV protocol. Similarly, a green line with circle marks shows results
of OLSR protocol, and a red line with X marks stands for AFAR.
As presented in the graph, the results of AODV and OLSR are
far from desired EM outcome. In the case of AODV, a large
amount of control message overhead for routing process signiﬁcantly increases end-to-end transmission delay so that reply message cannot be arrived within an application deadline
(1 s). For OLSR, PDR is highly degraded since predeﬁned routing table at initial stage cannot eﬃciently reﬂect the dynamically varying channel conditions of smart grid environments.
When the reply message is lost, DEM cannot be aware of current status of the solar PV system so it cannot decide whether
to use DS or not. Also, it does not know how much energy
should be utilized from DS. Therefore, instead of DS, lacking
energy is supplied by the external power source connected to
bus 799. As a result, power loss becomes greatly larger than
the optimal case because additional power is dissipated in
the transmission line. On the other hand, AFAR shows almost
optimal results compared to the other reactive and proactive
protocols. This result implies that AFAR is less vulnerable to
the severe smart grid channel conditions and is able to meet
target end-to-end delay easily. Table 3 represents an average power loss of each protocol during the cloud transients
(i.e., 50–130 s and 170–230 s). The difference of power loss
between AFAR and optimal case is only 1.13 kW, while AODV
and OLSR show 10.04 kW and 4.96 kW each. The PDR of AFAR,
AODV, and OLSR was 0.73, 0.28, and 0.50, respectively. Fig. 29
shows relation between PDR and the power loss. As can be

22

K. Kim et al. / Computer Networks 91 (2015) 1–25

Fig. 30. The voltage proﬁle of bus 736 during ﬁrst cloud transient.

seen in the ﬁgure, as PDR increases, the amount of power loss
decreases.
Evaluation with respect to voltage proﬁle: In the distribution system, power quality is highly affected by the voltage
proﬁle. There exist a number of metrics for voltage quality
analysis. What they have in common is that they are interested in whether the voltage magnitude keeps constant level
and operates within a desired range or not. In our scenario, a
cloud transient causes a sudden drop in power output of solar PV system, and this leads to an abrupt decrease in voltage
magnitude.
Fig. 30 presents voltage magnitude of bus 736 in 37 node
system. When the solar PV system operates under normal
conditions, an inﬂuence on the voltage proﬁle due to the
communication failure is not signiﬁcant. Therefore, we highlighted results of during the cloud transient. As can be seen
in the graph, when DS and EM units are not deployed, more
than 4% of voltage suddenly drops. Although this is not extreme, it can impose a stress to system utilities and causes an
inconvenience to end electricity customers. When DS and EM
schemes are used under the ideal condition, voltage magnitude slightly increases. In terms of per-unit volts, this leads
to a better voltage proﬁle for the system since ideal per-unit
value is 1. This shows that our EM application can successfully stabilize the voltage proﬁle. However, when communication failure exists, voltage outputs are placed between optimal case and worst case. Table 3 shows the average voltage deviations of bus 736 during the cloud transients (i.e.,
50–130 s and 170–230 s). The voltage deviation is deﬁned as
how much the given voltage is away from a nominal voltage
(1 p.u.). AODV and OLSR have voltage deviation of 0.0172 p.u.
and 0.0082 p.u. each. The differences with compare to optimal value is 0.0127 and 0.0037. However, AFAR shows voltage
deviation of 0.0043 p.u., and its difference with optimal value
is only 0.0002 p.u. This result implies that AFAR can successfully operates given EM smart grid application.

scalability. In this paper, we proposed AFAR to support robust
and delay-constraint communication for smart grid applications. We have provided new addressing scheme and basic
routing protocol in the basic framework and have proposed
additional functionalities needed in speciﬁc smart grid applications in the extension framework. AFAR can be adopted at
HAN and FAN for control and monitoring purposes. We evaluated AFAR using network simulator, OPNET, under a wide
range of network conﬁgurations to verify that the proposed
framework is adequate for smart grid purposes. Furthermore,
by co-simulating AFAR under the speciﬁc energy management scenario, we showed that AFAR can successfully perform its mission in real smart grid application.
We have several directions for ongoing and future research. We would like to apply AFAR to various MAC/PHY protocols in order to use the proposed framework in each application speciﬁc manners. Moreover, we plan to apply AFAR
to actual smart grid devices to evaluate performances of the
proposed framework under real-world smart grid environments.

Acknowledgments
This research was supported by Basic Science Research
Program through the National Research Foundation of Korea (NRF) funded by the Ministry of Education (NRF2013R1A1A2010388) and “Human Resources program in Energy Technology” of the Korea Institute of Energy Technology
Evaluation and Planning (KETEP) granted ﬁnancial resource
from the Ministry of Trade, Industry and Energy, Korea (no.
20154030200610)

Appendix A. Area of forwarding region
The forwarding region is the region where forwarding
candidates for end-to-end packet delivery process may be
located. To calculate the area of a forwarding region, the
equation for outer-most boundary line should be obtained.
Fig. A.31 shows the ﬁrst three segments of the upper boundary line. As can be seen in the ﬁgure, a boundary consists of a
number of line segments which their length is equal to transmission range R. Let Nn be a nth outer-most forwarding node
starting from the source node N0 . α n is an ∠Nn DNn−1 , β n denotes an angle between Nn+1 Nn and a line parallel to N0 D,
and dn is the distance between Nn and the destination node

6. Conclusion
The communication characteristics and requirements in
smart grid are quite different from traditional networks: severe wireless interference, short and bounded delay, and

Fig. A.31. The ﬁrst three stage of forwarding region.

K. Kim et al. / Computer Networks 91 (2015) 1–25

23

D. According to the law of cosines, dn is given by

dn =

2
R2 + dn−1
− 2Rdn−1 cos

θf

(A.1)

2

where θ f is a forwarding angle. Then, α n is given as
2
dn−1
+ dn2 − R2

αn = cos−1

2dn−1 dn

,

α0 = 0

(A.2)

and β n is given by

βn =

θf
2

− αn

(A.3)

since an angle between Nn D and the line parallel to N0 D is
equal to α n as alternate interior angles.
Let (xn , yn ) denote the Cartesian coordinates of Nn . Using
α n and iterative method we have

xn = xn−1 + R cos βn
yn = yn−1 + R sin βn

Fig. B.32. Previous forwarding sector.

(A.4)

Therefore, the boundary of forwarding region can be represented as

y=

yn+1 − yn
(x − xn ) + yn , xn ≤ x ≤ xn+1 ,
xn+1 − xn

(A.5)

and the area of forwarding region is given as
N

A f (d) =

xn+1

n=0

xn

yn+1 − yn
(x − xn ) + yn dx.
xn+1 − xn

(A.6)

Now we determine the expected area of forwarding region.
Assuming the square shaped network with side length a, the
distribution of distance between two random points can be
represented as follows [56].

fD (d) =

⎧
2d
⎪
⎪
⎨

π − 4d + d2
a3
a4
2
π
2
+ +d −
−2d
a2

a2

a2

if d ≤ a,

Fig. B.33. Deriving the area of previous forwarding sector.

a4

√
⎪
⎪
⎩ 4 sin−1 ( da ) − 4 d2 −a2
a2
a3

if a ≤ d ≤

√
2a.
(A.7)

Consequently, the expected area of forwarding region is
√

Af =

0

2a

A f (d) fD (d) d.

(A.8)

Appendix B. Previous forwarding sector
Previous forwarding sector of a node is the region where
any nodes in it can forwards a packet to the designated node.
The area of the region is dependent on distance between
node itself and the target destination. In this section, we obtain the area of the previous forwarding sector.
First, we identify the geometric characteristics of the region. See Fig. B.32. Assume two congruent circles C1 and C2
meet at the target node N and the destination node D, and
the angle between two tangent lines at N and D is equal to θ f .
O1 and O2 denote the center of C1 and C2 . C3 is a circle with
radius R (i.e., transmission range) centered at N. Let P1 be a
point on C1 . Then according to the inscribed angle theorem,
ࢬNP1 D is always constant if P1 is a point on major arc. As
P1 moves closer and closer to the point N, ࢬNP1 D becomes

θ f /2 by the deﬁnition of alternate interior angles. Therefore,
previous forwarding sector is given by excluding overlapping
regions between C3 and other circles from C3 .
Now we obtain the area of previous forwarding sector. As
can be seen in Fig. B.33, the area can be calculated by subtracting the area of dashed region twice from the circular
sector of C3 with central angle β . And the area of dashed
region can be obtained by subtracting NO1 P1 from circular
sector NO1 P1 . To determine those areas, α , β , and γ should
be obtained. α is simply θ f /2 by the deﬁnition of previous forwarding sector. ࢬO1 P1 N is equal to γ since P1 N is base line of
isosceles triangle O1 P1 N. Let R be a radius of circle centered
at N, and r to be a radius of circle centered at O1 . Using the
law of cosines, γ is given as

γ = cos−1

R2 + r2 − r2
2Rr

= cos−1

R
.
2r

(B.1)

The angle between O1 N and P3 N is equal to π /2 since P3 N is a
tangent to the circle. Therefore, β is given by

β =α+

π
2

−γ =

θf
2

+

π
2

− cos−1

R
.
2r

(B.2)

To remove unknown variable r from the equations, we ﬁgure
out the relationship between r and the length of ND (i.e., the

24

K. Kim et al. / Computer Networks 91 (2015) 1–25

distance to the destination). See triangle O1 NM. According
to the inscribed angle theorem, angle ࢬNO1 D is equal to 2α .
Therefore, it is evident that ࢬNO1 M is equal to α . Then the
relationship between r and d is as follow.

O1 N sin α = NM, r sin α =

d
d
, r=
.
2
2 sin α

(B.3)

Consequently, α , β , and γ is given as

α =

θf
2

,

β=

γ = cos−1

θf

+

2

π

R sin α
,
d

− cos−1

2

R sin α
.
d

(B.4)

As a result, the area of the previous forwarding sector can be
represented as

A p,d = β R2 − (π − 2γ )

+R

d
2 sin α

2

−

d
2 sin α
R
2

2

2

, if d ≥ R sin α .

(B.5)

When d is less than Rsin α , entire area of C1 and C2 are
included in C1 . In this case, the area of previous forwarding
sector can be obtained by subtracting the area of major sectors O1 ND and O2 ND from C3 , and adding the area of triangles O1 ND and O2 ND. Both central angles of the circular sectors are given as 2π − θ f since ࢬNO1 D and ࢬNO2 D is
equal to θ f according to the inscribed angle theorem. Therefore, the area of the previous forwarding sector when d is less
than Rsin α can be given as

A p,d = π R2 − 2π

−d

d
2 sin α

d
2 sin α
2

−

d
2

2

+ θ f R2
2

, i f 0 ≤ d ≤ R sin α .

(B.6)

References
[1] F.F. Wu, K. Moslehi, A. Bose, Power system control centers: past,
present, and future, Proc. IEEE 93 (11) (2005) 1890–1908.
[2] H. Farhangi, The path of the smart grid, IEEE Power Energy Mag. 8 (1)
(2010) 18–28.
[3] D. Niyato, L. Xiao, P. Wang, Machine-to-machine communications for
home energy management system in smart grid, IEEE Commun. Mag.
49 (4) (2011) 53–59.
[4] T. Ackermann, G. Andersson, L. Söder, Distributed generation: a deﬁnition, Electr. Power Syst. Res. 57 (3) (2001) 195–204.
[5] S.M. Amin, B.F. Wollenberg, Toward a smart grid: power delivery for the
21st century, IEEE Power Energy Mag. 3 (5) (2005) 34–41.
[6] V.C. Gungor, B. Lu, G.P. Hancke, Opportunities and challenges of wireless sensor networks in smart grid, IEEE Trans. Ind. Electron. 57 (10)
(2010) 3557–3564.
[7] E. Ancillotti, R. Bruno, M. Conti, The role of communication systems in
smart grids: architectures, technical solutions and research challenges,
Comput. Commun. 36 (17) (2013) 1665–1697.
[8] R.H. Khan, J.Y. Khan, A comprehensive review of the application characteristics and traﬃc requirements of a smart grid communications network, Comput. Netw. 57 (3) (2013) 825–845.
[9] W. Wang, Y. Xu, M. Khanna, A survey on the communication architectures in smart grid, Comput. Netw. 55 (15) (2011) 3604–3629.
[10] L. Zhou, J.J. Rodrigues, Service-oriented middleware for smart grid:
principle, infrastructure, and application, IEEE Commun. Mag. 51 (1)
(2013) 84–89.
[11] ETSI TR 102 935 V2.1.1: “Machine-to-machine Communications
(M2M); Applicability of M2M Architecture to Smart Grid Networks;
Impact of Smart Grids on M2M Platform”, 2012.

[12] V.C. Gungor, D. Sahin, T. Kocak, S. Ergut, C. Buccella, C. Cecati,
G.P. Hancke, Smart grid technologies: communication technologies and
standards, IEEE Trans. Ind. Inform. 7 (4) (2011) 529–539.
[13] N. Kilic, V.C. Gungor, Analysis of low power wireless links in smart grid
environments, Comput. Netw. 57 (5) (2013) 1192–1203.
[14] B. Karimi, V. Namboodiri, V. Aravinthan, W. Jewell, Feasibility, challenges, and performance of wireless multi-hop routing for feeder level
communication in a smart grid, in: Proceedings of the Second International Conference on Energy-eﬃcient Computing and Networking,
ACM, 2011, pp. 31–40.
[15] S.
¸ Temel, V.Ç. Gungor, T. Koçak, Routing protocol design guidelines for
smart grid environments, Comput. Netw. 60 (2014) 160–170.
[16] N. Saputro, K. Akkaya, S. Uludag, A survey of routing protocols for smart
grid communications, Comput. Netw. 56 (11) (2012) 2742–2771.
[17] S. Galli, A. Scaglione, Z. Wang, For the grid and through the grid: the
role of power line communications in the smart grid, Proc. IEEE 99 (6)
(2011) 998–1027.
[18] C. Eklund, R.B. Marks, K.L. Stanwood, S. Wang, IEEE standard 802.16: a
technical overview of the wirelessMANTM air interface for broadband
wireless access, IEEE Commun. Mag. 40 (6) (2002) 98–107.
[19] P. Yi, A. Iwayemi, C. Zhou, Developing ZigBee deployment guideline
under WiFi interference for smart grid applications, IEEE Trans. Smart
Grid 2 (1) (2011) 110–120.
[20] L. Zhou, J.J. Rodrigues, L.M. Oliveira, QoE-driven power scheduling in
smart grid: architecture, strategy, and methodology, IEEE Commun.
Mag. 50 (5) (2012) 136–141.
[21] T. Clausen, P. Jacquet, C. Adjih, A. Laouiti, P. Minet, P. Muhlethaler,
A. Qayyum, L. Viennot, et al., Optimized Link State Routing Protocol
(OLSR), 2003.
[22] C.E. Perkins, E.M. Royer, Ad-hoc on-demand distance vector routing,
in: Second IEEE Workshop on Mobile Computing Systems and Applications, 1999. Proceedings. WMCSA’99, IEEE, 1999, pp. 90–100.
[23] Y.-C. Tseng, S.-Y. Ni, Y.-S. Chen, J.-P. Sheu, The broadcast
storm problem in a mobile ad hoc network, Wireless Netw.
8 (2–3) (2002) 153–167.
[24] R. Nerem, K. Larson, Global positioning system, theory and practice,
Eos, Trans. Am. Geophys. Union 82 (33) (2001) 365.
[25] L.M. Ni, D. Zhang, M.R. Souryal, RFID-based localization and tracking
technologies, IEEE Wireless Commun. 18 (2) (2011) 45–51.
[26] S. Pandey, P. Agrawal, A survey on localization techniques for wireless
networks, J. Chin. Inst. Eng. 29 (7) (2006) 1125–1148.
[27] S. Yoo, E. Kim, H. Kim, Exploiting user movement direction and hidden
access point for smartphone localization, Wireless Personal Commun.
78 (4) (2014) 1863–1878.
[28] X. Li, J. Yang, A. Nayak, I. Stojmenovic, Localized geographic routing to
a mobile sink with guaranteed delivery in sensor networks, IEEE J. Selected Areas Commun. 30 (9) (2012) 1719–1729.
[29] Q. Chen, S.S. Kanhere, M. Hassan, Adaptive position update for geographic routing in mobile ad hoc networks, IEEE Trans. Mobile Comput.
12 (3) (2013) 489–501.
[30] C. Zhu, L.T. Yang, L. Shu, V. Leung, J.J. Rodrigues, L. Wang, Sleep scheduling for geographic routing in duty-cycled mobile sensor networks, IEEE
Trans. Ind. Electron. 61 (11) (2014) 6346–6355.
[31] M. Abolhasan, T. Wysocki, E. Dutkiewicz, A review of routing protocols
for mobile ad hoc networks, Ad hoc Netw. 2 (1) (2004) 1–22.
[32] X. Ma, X. Chen, H.H. Refai, Unsaturated performance of IEEE 802.11
broadcast service in vehicle-to-vehicle networks, in: 2007 IEEE 66th
Vehicular Technology Conference, 2007. VTC-2007 Fall, IEEE, 2007,
pp. 1957–1961.
[33] X. Ma, X. Chen, Performance analysis of IEEE 802.11 broadcast scheme
in ad hoc wireless LANs, IEEE Trans. Vehicular Technol. 57 (6) (2008)
3757–3768.
[34] L. Kleinrock, Queueing Systems, Volume I: Theory, 1975.
[35] A. Tsertou, D.I. Laurenson, Revisiting the hidden terminal problem in
a CSMA/CA wireless network, IEEE Trans. Mobile Comput. 7 (7) (2008)
817–831.
[36] B. Gaboune, G. Laporte, F. Soumis, Expected distances between two uniformly distributed random points in rectangles and rectangular parallelepipeds, J. Oper. Res. Soc. 44 (5) (1993) 513–519.
[37] W.R. Heinzelman, A. Chandrakasan, H. Balakrishnan, Energy-eﬃcient
communication protocol for wireless microsensor networks, in: Proceedings of the 33rd Annual Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences, 2000, IEEE, 2000, p. 10.
[38] H. Zhang, H. Shen, Energy-eﬃcient beaconless geographic routing in
wireless sensor networks, IEEE Trans. Parallel Distrib. Syst. 21 (6) (2010)
881–896.
[39] S. Lindsey, C.S. Raghavendra, PEGASIS: power-eﬃcient gathering in
sensor information systems, in: IEEE Aerospace Conference Proceedings, 2002, vol. 3, IEEE, 2002, pp. 3–1125.

K. Kim et al. / Computer Networks 91 (2015) 1–25
[40] M.R. Jafri, N. Javaid, A. Javaid, Z.A. Khan, Maximizing the lifetime of
multi-chain PEGASIS using sink mobility, World Appl. Sci. J. 21 (9)
(2013) 1283–1289.
[41] H. Bagci, A. Yazici, An energy aware fuzzy approach to unequal clustering in wireless sensor networks, Appl. Soft Comput. 13 (4) (2013)
1741–1749.
[42] A. Usman, S.H. Shami, Evolution of communication technologies for
smart grid applications, Renewable Sustainable Energy Rev. 19 (2013)
191–199.
[43] G. Bianchi, F. Formisano, D. Giustiniano, 802.11 b/g link level measurements for an outdoor wireless campus network, in: Proceedings of the
2006 International Symposium on World of Wireless, Mobile and Multimedia Networks, IEEE Computer Society, 2006, pp. 525–530.
[44] D. Aguayo, J. Bicket, S. Biswas, G. Judd, R. Morris, Link-level measurements from an 802.11 b mesh network, ACM SIGCOMM Comput. Commun. Rev. 34 (4) (2004) 121–132.
[45] Ö. Alay, T. Korakis, Y. Wang, S. Panwar, An experimental study of packet
loss and forward error correction in video multicast over IEEE 802.11
b network, in: Sixth IEEE Consumer Communications and Networking
Conference, 2009. CCNC 2009, IEEE, 2009, pp. 1–5.
[46] K.C. Budka, J.G. Deshpande, M. Thottan, Communication networks for
smart grids, in: Computer Communications and Networks, Springer,
2014.
[47] D.B. Johnson, D.A. Maltz, Dynamic source routing in ad hoc wireless
networks, in: Mobile Computing, Springer, 1996, pp. 153–181.
[48] H. Kim, W. Park, H. Kim, Towards cosimulating network and electrical systems for performance evaluation in smart grid, in: SAC’13, 2013,
pp. 686–687.
[49] S. Kotamarty, S. Khushalani, N. Schulz, Impact of distributed generation on distribution contingency analysis, Electr. Power Syst. Res. 78
(9) (2008) 1537–1545.
[50] A. Florita, B.-M. Hodge, K. Orwig, Identifying wind and solar ramping events, in: 2013 IEEE Green Technologies Conference, IEEE, 2013,
pp. 147–152.
[51] F. Giraud, Z.M. Salameh, Analysis of the effects of a passing cloud on a
grid-interactive photovoltaic system with battery storage using neural
networks, IEEE Trans. Energy Conversion 14 (4) (1999) 1572–1577.
[52] W.T. Jewell, T.D. Unruh, Limits on cloud-induced ﬂuctuation in photovoltaic generation, IEEE Trans. Energy Conversion 5 (1) (1990) 8–14.
[53] C.A. Hill, M.C. Such, D. Chen, J. Gonzalez, W.M. Grady, Battery energy
storage for enabling integration of distributed solar power generation,
IEEE Trans. Smart Grid 3 (2) (2012) 850–857.
[54] R.D.T. Feeders, IEEE distribution planning working group report, IEEE
Trans. Power Syst. 6 (3) (1991) 975–985.
[55] A. Anwar, H. Pota, Loss reduction of power distribution network using optimum size and location of distributed generation, in: 21st Australasian Universities Power Engineering Conference (AUPEC), 2011,
IEEE, 2011, pp. 1–6.
[56] J. Philip, The Probability Distribution of the Distance between Two Random Points in a Box, KTH Mathematics, Royal Institute of Technology,
2007.

25
Kangho Kim was born on July 17, 1989, in Seoul,
Korea. He received Bachelor’s degree in Electrical Engineering in Korea University, Seoul, Korea in 2014. Currently, he is a M.S.E. student in
the school of Electrical Engineering at Korea University. His research interests include smart grid,
wireless multi-hop networks, network modeling,
mobility management, unmanned aerial vehicle,
and ﬂying ad-hoc networks.

Hwantae Kim received his B.S. and M.S. degrees
from the School of Electrical Engineering, Korea
University, Seoul, Korea, in 2012 and 2014. He is
currently a research engineer in LG Electronics,
Seoul. His research interests include wireless networking in smart grid, wireless home area networking and home energy management system.

Jongtack Jung is currently a Ph.D. student in the
School of Electrical Engineering at Korea University, Seoul, Korea. He received his B.S.E. degree in
Electrical Engineering at Korea University, Seoul,
Korea, in 2013. His research interests are in the areas of indoor localization, acoustic ranging, cloud
computing and uniﬁed mobile sensor platform.
He was born in November 10th, 1989.

Hwangnam Kim received the B.S.E. degree in
computer engineering from Pusan National University, Busan, Korea, in 1992, the M.S.E. degree in
computer engineering from Seoul National University, Seoul, Korea, in 1994, and the Ph.D. degree in computer science from the University of
Illinois at Urbana-Champaign in 2004. He is currently an associate professor with the School of
Electrical Engineering, Korea University, Seoul,
Korea. His research interests are in the areas of
network modeling and simulations, community
wireless networks, and cyber physical systems.

