A Laurin Publication
I MAGING S OFTWARE
Photonic Solutions for Biotechnology and Medicine
Image Processing
with ImageJ
by Dr. Michael D. Abràmoff, University of Iowa Hospitals and Clinics; Dr. Paulo J. Magalhães,
University of Padua; and Dr. Sunanda J. Ram, Louisiana State University Health Sciences Center
As the popularity of the ImageJ open-source,
Java-based imaging program grows, its capabilities increase,
too. It is now being used for imaging applications
ranging from skin analysis to neuroscience.
T
he advances of the medical and bi-
ological sciences over recent years,
and the growing importance of de-
termining the relationships between struc-
ture and function, have made imaging an
increasingly important discipline. The
ubiquitousness of digital technology —
from banal digital cameras to highly spe-
cific micro-CT scanners — has made im-
ages an essential part of a number of re-
search areas, from nanotechnology to as-
tronomy.
It is common practice for manufactur-
ers of image acquisition devices to include
dedicated image processing software, but
these programs are usually not very flex-
ible and/or do not allow more complex
image manipulations. Image processing
programs also are available by themselves.
ImageJ holds a unique position because
it not only is in the public domain (mean-
ing that its source code is openly avail-
able and its use is license-free), but also
runs on any operating system. It is at-
tractive because it is easy to use, can per-
form a full set of imaging manipulations
and has a huge and knowledgeable user
community.
The program is the brainchild of Wayne
Rasband of the Research Services Branch,
National Institute of Mental Health, in
Bethesda, Md. It is called ImageJ because
it is written in the Java language. Its first
release, version 0.50, was Sept. 23, 1997,
and it is now in version 1.31, released in
February.
According to the institute, it has been
downloaded from its Web site tens of
Figure 1. A scintillation rendering of
the 3-D motion field of a fat-muscle
phantom was combined with a
surface rendering to show motion
and anatomy of the phantom. The
motion data were obtained as
1.5-T MRI gradient echo T1
weighted image sequences, while
the phantom was rotated in place at
5° per frame. The motion field is too
dense for motion and surface to be
rendered in the same place. The
axis of rotation was oriented
perpendicular to the surface of the
phantom. The hue of the color codes
for direction, and the saturation of
the color codes for motion
magnitude. Obtained with ImageJ
running VolumeJ for volume
rendering and FlowJ for 3-D optical
flow estimation. Provided by
Michael Abràmoff.
Reprinted from the July 2004 issue of Biophotonics International © Laurin Publishing Co. Inc.I MAGING S OFTWARE
thousands of times, with
the current rate being about
24,000 downloads per
month. Rasband said that,
after working for 10 years
on NIH Image, ImageJ’s
precursor, he didn’t see
a bright future for it, even
though Scion Corp. of
Frederick, Md., had ported
it from a Macintosh-only
version to the PC/Windows
platform. However, the
Scion version wasn’t open
source, and he is a strong
proponent of open source
and platform indepen-
dence. So he began writing
ImageJ in early 1997 after
he had become intrigued
by the new Java program-
ming language.
Obviously, with a free
program, there is no tele-
phone hot line for support.
However, a large user base
communicates through a
mailing list. This way, any
user is free to ask ques-
tions, put forward sugges-
tions or ideas for new
imaging functions and
publish solutions. At the
time of this writing, this
community consisted of
more than 1000 users/
scientists (the majority)
and users/developers (in
smaller numbers, but of
fundamental importance).
Indeed, the know-how
of the community is re-
markably high because
many members possess a
detailed knowledge of the
software and the imaging
Imaging capabilities
problems that the program
ImageJ can read most
Figure 2. This screen shot shows thresholding, edge detection,
can address efficiently. A
of the common and im-
particle analysis with particles indicated, and histogram analysis on
request on the mailing list
portant formats used in
the gray-scale diatoms image (upper left).
is usually all it takes for
the field of biomedical
someone, somewhere in
imaging (see table). If a
the world, to provide the required help.
file format is not currently supported,
and division. In addition, visualization
For example, Dr. Rex Couture of the
someone from the international user/
operations, including color space con-
department of radiology at Washington
developer community usually develops
versions — for example, converting from
University School of Medicine in St. Louis
support within days. In addition,
RGB to Hue Saturation Intensity color
ran into a problem with reading large
ImageJ can be used to acquire images
space, two- and three-dimensional plot-
micro-CT images. These files were about
directly from scanners, cameras and
ting — and surface and volume render-
5 GB, but ImageJ couldn’t read beyond
other video sources, including cameras
ing, are supported. It also offers core sup-
the 4-GB limit at that time. “I posted a
that are compatible with TWAIN and
port for analyzing electrophoretic gels.
query about this,” Couture said. “Within
FireWire, and frame grabber boards
an hour or two, someone working
from Cooke, National Instruments and
Cross-platform
through the night in Europe had found
PixelSmart.
One of the strong points of ImageJ is
the problem. By 9:30 the next morning,
The program supports all common
its ability to run on different platforms.
I had a solution to try from Wayne. Since
image manipulations, including reading
Statistics covering the last three months,
he didn’t have an image file that large, he
and writing of image files, and operations
with more than 80,000 downloads, in-
couldn’t test it, and it didn’t quite work.
on individual pixels, image regions, whole
dicate that it is being used mostly with
Twenty-four hours later he had created a
images and volumes. Volumes, called
Microsoft operating systems (80 percent),
test image, and I had a fully debugged
stacks in ImageJ, are ordered sequences
followed by Macintosh platforms (16 per-
new version that solved the problem.”
of images that can be operated upon as a
cent) and Linux (4 percent). Although
Shortly thereafter, someone in the dis-
whole. It can perform basic operations
these numbers are estimates and can be
cussion group also posted a way to open
such as convolution, edge detection,
misleading because someone could down-
large tiff files.
Fourier transform, histogram and parti-
load it to one platform and use it on an-
There has always been a somewhat terse
cle analyses (including sophisticated sta-
other, it is interesting to note the rela-
usage instruction on the ImageJ Web site,
tistical processing of groups of particles),
tively high number of Macintosh users
but getting advice on a specific function
editing and color manipulation; and more
(the worldwide market share was less than
required taking the quite intimidating
sophisticated operations such as dilation,
2 percent in 2003, according to market
step of asking the mailing list. Now one
erosion and closing of structures, and
research company IDC), supporting the
has the option of using a manual recently
mathematical operations on sets of im-
long-held view that this type of computer
produced by Tony Collins at the Wright
ages, such as multiplication, exclusive or,
attracts large sections of academia.I MAGING S OFTWARE
Figure 3. This simple ImageJ macro
acquires an image every 10 seconds
and stores it in sequence.
Cell Imaging Facility at Toronto Western
Research Institute. This free, very thor-
ough manual has many examples and il-
lustrations. It emphasizes microscopy and
accompanies a collection of microscopy-
related plug-ins. Although many open-
source programs lack an extensive user
manual, even novices can find most of
the information for their imaging needs
in this manual.
Extensions: Macros and plug-ins
The program is virtually limitless be-
cause of the availability of user-written
macros and plug-ins.
for (i = 0; i < 5; i++)
//5 frames

next = getTime ()+ 10 * 1000;
//10s between frames
//Run plug-in that grabs from a Quicktime framegrabber
run (“QT Capture”, “grab”);
while (getTime) () < next) wait (1);
//until 10s are over.

Macros are meant to make it easier to
automate oft-repeated tasks, which would
be tedious to implement manually.
ImageJ has an easy-to-use macro-language
that means that knowledge of Java isn’t
required for writing simple scripts. For
example, a macro can be written that ac-
quires an image every 10 seconds and
stores it in a sequence (Figure 3).
Plug-ins are external programs, mostly
written in the Java language, that offer
image processing capabilities that do not
TABLE
Image formats supported by ImageJ as of June 2004
Format Read and write
Analyze (Mayo Clinic’s format)
AVI uncompressed movies
Bio-Rad Z-series
BMP
DICOM (uncompressed) read
DICOM (uncompressed) write
DM3 (Gatan Corp. transmission electron microscopy format)
FDF, VFF (Varian MRI imaging system/EVS 900 micro-CT system
formats)
FITS (NASA format)
GIF (including animated)
ICO, CUR (MS Windows)
IPLab (Scanalytics Corp. microscopy format)
Jpeg
Jpeg EXIF digital camera header
Leica SP multichannel
LSM (Zeiss LSM 510 confocal microscopes)
PCX (Zsoft Corp.)
PDS (Planetary Data System)
PGM (P2 and P5)
PICT (Apple Mac)
PNG
PSD (Adobe Photoshop)
QuickTime movies
Raw (any uncompressed file format not directly supported,
8-,16-, 24-bit RGB, 32-bit, small- and big-endian)
SIF (Andor Technology spectroscopy format)
SPE format (Roper Scientific cameras)
Sunraster
Targa
Text images (tab or comma separated)
Tiff uncompressed and zip compressed, both as
1-, 8-, 12-, 16-bit unsigned, 32-bit (real)
or RGB color, single and multiple images (stacks)
XBM, XPM (X-Windows formats)
XLS (Microsoft Excel) (plug-in)

(plug-in)


(plug-in)
(plug-in)
(plug-in)
read

(plug-in)
(plug-in)

(plug-in)
(plug-in)
(plug-in)
(plug-in)
(plug-in)
read
(plug-in)

(plug-in)


(plug-in)
(plug-in)
(plug-in)
(plug-in)


(plug-in)
(plug-in)
exist in core capabilities of ImageJ. Once
implemented, they cannot be distin-
guished from the program itself. A small
cottage industry has sprouted from users/
developers who are designing plug-ins
for their own use and sharing them with
all users. Plug-ins have brought ImageJ
from an image processing program to a
framework that scientists can use to de-
velop their own imaging solutions.
Plug-ins range from very small and
straightforward, such as the Grid plug-in
— which simply draws a grid on an image
— to complex, practically stand-alone
image programs, such as the dendrite-
tracing tool NeuronJ 1 or the surface and
volume-rendering plug-in VolumeJ. 2 In
fact, the standard imaging capabilities
that ImageJ comes with are implemented
as plug-ins as well. Developing new plug-
ins requires knowing Java language and is
thus not for everyone.
However, after using ImageJ for a while,
users often need a specific solution for
their problem that goes beyond its core ca-
pabilities. The Medientechnik und design
group in Austria has written a tutorial
specifically as an introduction to writing
plug-ins for ImageJ.
Most plug-ins that are judged by their
developers to be of general use can be
published on the ImageJ Web site, which
now holds more than 150 plug-ins, writ-
ten by 98 developers. Some developers
may instead make their plug-ins and
macros available through personal Web
sites; some of these are listed on the
ImageJ site.
Imaging library
A third way of extending ImageJ, which
is used by only a small number of more
technically advanced developers, is to use
its imaging capabilities and plug-ins from
their own programs, so that, in technical
terms, they are using it as a library of imag-
ing methods. This is called ImageJ’s ap-
plication programmer’s interface (API),
which has been extensively documented
so that it is clear how to use and carry
out these methods. This way, several
online image database servers have beenI MAGING S OFTWARE
Figure 4. The main window in the
back shows a fluorescence
microscopy image (compiled from
several scans) of a neuronal cell and
its outgrowth, together with the
primary (red), secondary (blue) and
tertiary (magenta) tracings.
Superimposed are the ImageJ
window (top left) with the NeuronJ
toolbar (replacing the ImageJ toolbar
during operation) and two NeuronJ
result windows (bottom right), giving
the length of individual tracings and
statistics on selections of tracings.
Courtesy of Erik Meijering, Erasmus
MC-University Medical Center
Rotterdam.
developed, including one for ophthal-
mologic telediagnosis.
The applications to which ImageJ has
been applied are astounding. Space lim-
itations dictate that only a few salient ex-
amples can be given here: Paulo Magal-
hães and co-workers in the department
of biomedical sciences at CNR Institute
of Neuroscience, University of Padua,
Italy, are using it to study the dynamics of
intracellular calcium, 3,4 while researchers
at the Laboratory for Cellular Neu-
robiology of the Swiss Federal Institute
of Technology in Lausanne and the
Biomedical Imaging Group at Erasmus
MC-University Medical Center Rotterdam
in the Netherlands, are using the NeuronJ
plug-in, for the automated quantitative
analysis of neurons and dendrites (Figure
4). 1 The NeuronJ plug-in is based on re-
cently developed and validated algorithms
for detecting and linking elongated image
structures specifically for this purpose.
Andrea Mothe and co-workers at the
department of zoology at the University
of Toronto at Scarborough, in collabora-
tion with Collins from Toronto Western
Research Institute, use ImageJ and the
VolumeJ plug-in for the 3-D reconstruc-
tion of the differential localization of
nerve cell gene expression (Figure 5).
Procter & Gamble in Cincinnati is using
ImageJ as a framework for Visia, a system
that carries out complexion analysis by
comparing skin texture analysis of a sub-
ject’s facial skin against the texture analy-
ses of other subjects stored in a database.
The program uses the ImageJ application
programmers interface (API) as a library
(Figure 6).
The Biomedical Imaging Group of the
Swiss Federal Institute of Technology is
Figure 5. This 3-D reconstruction of DAPI-stained (blue) nuclei in a rat spinal
cord section after intraventricular DiI injection results in red-staining of cells
in the ependymal cell layer of the central cord. Scale bar = 10 μm. Image
processed with ImageJ running VolumeJ and provided by Andrea Mothe and
Tony Collins, Toronto Western Research Institute.I MAGING S OFTWARE
using the program to teach image pro-
cessing to engineering students, 5,6 and the
Center for Image Processing in Education
of Tucson, Ariz., is using it for teaching
basic imaging to high school students. 7
Dr. Michael D. Abràmoff and co-work-
Figure 6. The Visia complexion analysis system uses ImageJ to analyze how the
client compares with a database of women in her age and skin-type groups for
the given categories — in this example, spots. It includes scores that indicate the
percentage of women who scored below the client’s evaluation for the category.
Provided by Procter & Gamble.
ers at the departments of ophthalmology
and radiology at University Hospital
Utrecht in the Netherlands, have used
ImageJ and the FlowJ and VolumeJ plug-
ins for the differentiation of orbital tu-
mors and for measuring the motion of
soft tissues in patients. 2,8
Abràmoff also worked with other clin-
icians to develop the EyeCheck Web site,
an online diabetic retinopathy screening
project in the Netherlands. It uses ImageJ’s
capabilities for storing and displaying reti-
nal images in a telediagnosis environ-
ment. The program can accept and store
a great variety of image formats, which
can then be used for manual grading by
ophthalmologists or for semiautomated
or automated detection of diabetic
retinopathy (Figure 7).
Finally, Dr. Peter Hurd at the depart-
ment of psychology, University of Alberta
in Edmonton, Canada, is using ImageJ to
determine the second to fourth digit ratio
(index to ring finger) in Anolis carolinen-
sis, or anole lizard, which is thought to
reflect the relative concentration of (or
sensitivity to) androgens during devel-
opment (Figure 8).
The program illustrates that imaging is
on the boundary between being a field
of science and a field of engineering. The
solutions being proposed by and imple-
mented in conjunction with users and de-
velopers are sometimes engineering so-
lutions (in that they are derived straight
Figure 8. ImageJ is being used to
examine the second to fourth digit
ratio (index to ring finger) in the
anole lizard, which is thought to
reflect the relative concentration of
or sensitivity to androgens during
development. Provided by Peter
Hurd, University of Alberta.
Figure 7. The EyeCheck Web site provides online diabetic retinopathy screening
from retinal color photographs. The left area of the image shows the Web page
with patient information. When this page is accessed, an ImageJ applet
automatically displays the retinal photographs (in this case, of a normal subject),
at right. This allows for user interaction so that, for example, the intensity image
can be displayed, as in the bottom part, or specific abnormalities can be marked.
Courtesy of EyeCheck.I MAGING S OFTWARE
Figure 9. The SmartRoot system, an
interactive plant root image analysis
plug-in, was developed by Xavier
Draye and co-workers at the Unité
d’Ecologie des Grandes Cultures,
Université Catholique de Louvain,
Louvain-la-Neuve, Belgium. The tool
helps the user track root objects,
displays them in different “layers,”
saves them in Extend Markup
Language documents and sends
measurements to any Standardized
Query Language-compliant
databases. Courtesy of Xavier Draye.
from textbook material or a publication)
and sometimes scientific solutions (when
necessity dictates a scientifically new ap-
proach to solve a real-world problem).
A critical and pragmatic reader may ex-
pect some drawbacks to ImageJ, and there
are some issues. The program requires
minimal computer knowledge for instal-
lation and first steps, while commercial
vendors may offer on-site installation and
training. Also, because of the continuous
state of development, bugs and “undoc-
umented features” can creep into the dis-
tributed version. This can be a problem for
the unaware researcher who compares
data acquired with the old and new ver-
sions. Users usually spot these problems,
and corrected versions of the program are
made available immediately.
There is a misconception that an imag-
ing program written in Java cannot be
fast, and this may divert some potential
users from ImageJ. Abràmoff used to share
this worry and tested its validity by rewrit-
ing some of his convolution routines
(which he had originally implemented
in Java) in C++ and calling these routines from a plug-in using the ImageJ Java
Native Interface API. Although there
was a decrease in processing time of
about 30 percent, this did not weigh up
to the increased development time for
the routines.
Furthermore, there is no inherent rea-
son why an algorithm coded in C++ will
run significantly faster than the same al-
gorithm coded in Java. The execution
speed depends on how good a compiler
is at optimizing the generated code. Many
people will even argue that the compil-
ers that translate Java byte code into ma-
chine code can do a better job of opti-
mization because more information is
available to them about the program
being compiled and about the machine
that it is running on. So the reason why
some commercial image processing pro-
Meet the authors Acknowledgment
Dr. Michael D. Abràmoff, ophthalmologist
and image science engineer, is at the depart-
ment of ophthalmology and visual sciences,
University of Iowa Hospitals and Clinics, Iowa
City, Iowa. He is the author of VolumeJ and
many other popular plug-ins; e-mail: michael
abramoff@uiowa.edu.
Paulo J. Magalhães is at the department of
biomedical sciences, University of Padua in
Italy. He has been a contributor of the popu-
lar Ratio Plus plug-in.
Sunanda J. Ram is assistant professor of
medicine at the Louisiana State University
Health Sciences Center in Shreveport. The authors wish to thank Wayne Rasband,
without whom neither ImageJ nor its com-
munity would have existed.
Please send requests for additional copies of
this article to biophotonics@laurin.com.
References
1. E. Meijering et al (April 2004). Cytometry
58A, pp. 167-176.
2. M.D. Abràmoff et al (February 2002). Invest
Ophthalmol. Vis. Sci. 43, pp. 300-307.
3. M.F. Abad et al (March 19, 2004). J Biol
grams are appreciably faster than ImageJ
at convolutions or similar processor-in-
tense operations is related to increased
sophistication of their algorithms. The
open nature of ImageJ, however, may en-
able end-users with inspiring insights to
develop better and more sophisticated al-
gorithms, without the constraints of pro-
prietary code.
In summary, ImageJ has attracted a var-
ied and dedicated group of users because
it is free and expandable, and can operate
on any platform. It is especially remarkable
how robustly the framework, designed six
years ago, has withstood the test of time.
Though it is difficult to predict where the
program will be five years from now, the
evolution will probably be a very inter-
esting and rewarding experience for both
users and developers.
G
Chem 279, pp. 11521-9.
4. L. Filippin et al (Oct. 3, 2003). J Biol Chem
278, pp. 39224-34.
5. D. Sage and M. Unser (2001). Proc. of the
2001 IEEE International Conference on Image
Processing, Thessaloniki, Greece 3, pp. 298-
301.
6. D. Sage and M. Unser (2004). IEEE Signal
Processing Magazine 20, pp. 43-52.
7. J.V. Ekstrom (2000). The Science Teacher 67,
pp. 53-55.
8. M.D. Abràmoff and M.A. Viergever (2002).
IEEE Trans. Med. Imaging 21, pp. 296-304.I MAGING S OFTWARE
Web Resources
•
•
•
•
•
rsb.info.nih.gov/ij — ImageJ and most of its plug-ins and macros are available for download.
www.uhnres.utoronto.ca/wcif/download.html — ImageJ manual by Tony Collins.
mtd.fh-hagenberg.at/depot/imaging/imagej — The Medientechnik und design group tutorial on writing plug-ins.
imagescience.bigr.nl/meijering/software/neuronj — NeuronJ is available for download.
bij.isi.uu.nl — Web site for VolumeJ and many other biomedical imaging plug-ins.
Publications in which ImageJ was used, listed by application
Function and dynamics of cells and organelles Retinal image analysis
• M. Ghosh et al (April 30, 2004). Cofilin promotes actin
polymerization and defines the direction of cell motility. SCI-
ENCE, pp. 743-746. • J. Staal et al (April 2004). Ridge-based vessel segmentation
in color images of the retina. IEEE TRANS. MED. IMAGING, pp.
501-509.
• M.D. Abràmoff et al (2004). A spatial truncation approach
to the analysis of optical imaging of the retina in humans and
cats. Proc. IEEE International Symposium on Biomedical Imaging
2004 2, pp. 1115-1118.
Imaging calcium and signal transduction
• T.J. Collins et al (April 2, 2002). Mitochondria are mor-
phologically and functionally heterogeneous within cells. EMBO
J., pp. 1616-1627.
• T.J. Collins and M.D. Bootman (June 2003). Mitochondria
are morphologically heterogeneous within cells. J. EXP. BIOL.,
pp. 1993-2000.
• J. Bruton et al (Aug. 15, 2003). Mitochondrial and my-
oplasmic [Ca 2+ ] in single fibres from mouse limb muscles dur-
ing repeated tetanic contractions. J. PHYSIOL., pp. 179-190.
• J.D. Bruton et al (Oct. 15, 2003). Mitochondrial function
in intact skeletal muscle fibres of creatine kinase deficient mice.
J. PHYSIOL., pp. 393-402.
Brain and fat tissue imaging
• B. Haelewyn et al (September 2003). Desflurane affords
greater protection than halothane against focal cerebral is-
chaemia in the rat. BR. J. ANAESTH., pp. 390-396.
• B. Haelewyn et al (April 2004). Cardioprotective effects of
desflurane: effect of timing and duration of administration in
rat myocardium. BR. J. ANAESTH., pp. 552-557.
• J.P. Sacha et al (May 2003). Quantification of regional fat vol-
ume in rat MRI. Proc. SPIE Medical Imaging, pp. 289-297.
Dental imaging Neuroscience
• R.A. Couture and C. Hildebolt (April 2000). Quantitative
dental radiography with a new photostimulable phosphor sys-
tem. ORAL SURG. ORAL MED. ORAL PATHOL. ORAL RA-
DIOL. ENDOD., pp. 498-508.
• R.A. Couture and C.F. Hildebolt (January 2002). Precise
image-receptor calibration and monitoring of beam quality
with a step wedge. DENTOMAXILLOFAC. RADIOL., pp. 56-
62.
• U. Meyer et al (April 2002). First experience with a public do-
main computer-aided surgical system. BR. J. ORAL MAXILLO-
FAC. SURG., pp. 96-104. • G. Aakalu et al (May 2001). Dynamic visualization of local
protein synthesis in hippocampal neurons. NEURON, pp. 489-
502.
• S.J. Tang et al (Nov. 8, 2001). A role for a rat homolog of
staufen in the transport of RNA to neuronal dendrites. NEURON,
pp. 463-475.
• M. Zonta et al (2003). Neuron-to-astrocyte signaling is cen-
tral to the dynamic control of brain microcirculation. NAT.
NEUROSCI., pp. 43-50.
Tumor differentiation and soft-tissue motion
measurement
• M.D. Abràmoff et al (October 2000). MRI dynamic color
mapping: a new quantitative technique for imaging soft tissue
motion in the orbit. INVEST. OPHTHALMOL. VIS. SCI., pp.
3256-3260.
• M.D. Abràmoff, W.J. Niessen and M.A. Viergever (October
2000). Objective quantification of the motion of soft tissues in
the orbit. IEEE TRANS. MED. IMAGING, pp. 986-995.
• M.D. Abràmoff et al (September 2001). Patients with per-
sistent pain after enucleation studied by MRI dynamic color
mapping and histopathology. INVEST. OPHTHALMOL. VIS.
SCI., pp. 2188-2192.
• M.D. Abràmoff and M.A. Viergever (April 2002).
Computation and visualization of three-dimensional soft tis-
sue motion in the orbit. IEEE TRANS. MED. IMAGING, pp.
296-304.
Craniofacial surgery simulation
• T. Stamm et al (December 2003). Validity of a three-di-
mensional public-domain system for contemporary endodontic
research. J. ENDOD., pp. 801-805.
Simulation of cell growth patterns
• G. Landini and P.M. Iannaccone (April 2000). Modeling of
mosaic patterns in chimeric liver and adrenal cortex: algorith-
mic organogenesis? FASEB J., pp. 823-827.
Telediagnosis and image servers
• J.D. Parker and J.W. Wallis (October 2003). Systems for
Remote Interpretation of Emergency Studies. SEMINARS IN
NUCLEAR MEDICINE XXXIII, pp. 324-330.
• M.D. Abràmoff (2003). Impact of Security on Data Transfer
in Teleophthalmology for Diabetic Retinopathy Screening over
the Internet. Proc. Computer Aided Fundus Imaging and Analysis
(CAFIA).