journal of information security and applications 23 (2015) 1–7

Available online at www.sciencedirect.com

ScienceDirect
j o u r n a l h o m e p a g e : w w w. e l s e v i e r. c o m / l o c a t e / j i s a

Fair secret reconstruction in (t, n) secret sharing
Lein Harn a, Changlu Lin b,*, Yong Li c,d
a

Department of Computer Science Electrical Engineering, University of Missouri-Kansas City, MO 64110, USA
College of Mathematics and Computer Science, Fujian Normal University, Fujian 350007, China
c
School of Electronic and Information Engineering, Beijing Jiaotong University, Beijing 100044, China
d
Fujian Provincial Key Laboratory of Network Security and Cryptology, Fujian Normal University, Fuzhou
350007, China
b

A R T I C L E

I N F O

A B S T R A C T

Article history:

In Shamir’s (t, n) threshold secret sharing scheme, one secret s is divided into n shares by

Available online 22 July 2015

a dealer and all shares are shared among n shareholders, such that knowing t or more than
t shares can reconstruct this secret; but knowing fewer than t shares cannot reveal any in-

Keywords:

formation about the secret s. The secret reconstruction phase in Shamir’s (t, n) threshold

Secret sharing

secret sharing is very simple and unconditionally secure. In 2014, Harn has shown that

Rational secret sharing

Shamir’s secret reconstruction phase cannot prevent an outside attacker from knowing the

Lagrange component

secret if more than t participants work together in the secret reconstruction phase. Harn’s

Secret reconstruction

paper also has proposed a reconstruction scheme which can prevent the outside adver-

Fair secret reconstruction

sary from knowing the secret. However, in Shamir’s secret reconstruction, when shares are

Asynchronous network

released asynchronously, a dishonest shareholder (an inside adversary) can always release
a fake share last so the dishonest shareholder can exclusively retrieve the secret; but other
honest shareholders retrieve a fake secret. In this paper, we design a secret reconstruction
scheme against both inside and outside adversaries. This scheme can also be called an asynchronously rational secret sharing scheme. Unlike other rational secret sharing schemes, our
scheme does not need any interactive dealer, complicate cryptographic primitives, or any
assumption on the number of honest shareholders.
© 2015 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

1.

Introduction

Secret sharing (SS) scheme which was introduced by Blakley
(1979) and Shamir (1979) independently in 1979 is a basic tool
for protecting cryptographic keys. A threshold SS involves a
dealer who has a secret, a set of n participants called shareholders, and a collection of subsets of shareholders who could
work together to recover the secret called the access structure. In Shamir’s (t, n) SS, the dealer divides the secret s into
n shares and distributes shares to n shareholders such that: (1)
any t or more than t shares can reconstruct the secret, and (2)

fewer than t shares cannot obtain any information about the
secret s.
Although secret reconstruction phase in Shamir’s scheme
is very simple, the assumption that participants in this phase
are all legitimate shareholders is not always true. In fact, adversaries who do not own valid shares can impersonate
shareholders to obtain the secret in Shamir’s reconstruction.
One simple way to overcome this security problem is to authenticate every participating user to be a legitimate shareholder
before reconstructing the secret. Since normal user authentication schemes are one-to-one type of interactions between
a prover and a verifier, this approach may slow down the secret

* Corresponding author. College of Mathematics and Computer Science, Fujian Normal University, Fujian 350007, China. Tel.: +86-1528010-2192; fax: +86-591-2286-8115
E-mail address: cllin@fjnu.edu.cn (C. Lin).
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.jisa.2015.07.001
2214-2126/© 2015 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

2

journal of information security and applications 23 (2015) 1–7

reconstruction significantly especially when there is a large
number of users participating in the process. In fact, in the
secret sharing scheme, only the dealer needs to know who are
the shareholders during registration. In the secret reconstruction, shareholders do not need to know each other. Whether
or not the participants can reconstruct the secret should depend
only on their shares. If all shares are valid, then the secret can
be reconstructed. Otherwise, the secret cannot be reconstructed.
The notion of verifiable secret sharing (VSS) which is used
to verify the validity of shareholders’ shares without revealing their shares and the secret was proposed in 1985 by Chor
et al. (1985). There are many papers on VSS in the literature
(see Feldman, 1978; Harn and Lin, 2010; Katz et al., 2008;
Pedersen, 1992 for more details). Although VSS scheme can be
used to check the validity of shares, VSS scheme cannot prevent
the adversary from obtaining the secret since shares are revealed to participants in the secret reconstruction. In VSSs, share
of each shareholder is protected from others.
In an asynchronous secret reconstruction, when all other
shareholders honestly release their shares, a dishonest shareholder can always exclusively recover the secret by presenting
a fake share last. Thus, the other honest shareholders get
nothing but a fake secret. Although VSS schemes have been
developed to detect fake shares (Brickell and Stinson, 1990; Harn
and Lin, 2009; Rabin and Ben-Or, 1989), they do not prevent the
cheater from exclusively recovering the secret.

1.1.

Related works on fair reconstruction of the secret

The first fair secret reconstruction scheme is proposed by Tompa
and Woll (1988). They proposed to hide the secret s in a sequence, {d1, d2, … , d j −1, d j, d j + 1, … , dk }, where dj = s, for some j
chosen randomly, and di = PDI, for all i ≠ j, where PDI is a public
dummy integer. Secret reconstruction process involves multiple rounds to recover elements of the sequence one at a time
following the order of the sequence. At each round, all shareholders release their shares and perform the reconstruction
to recover each element of the sequence. In their scheme, if
all shareholders release their shares asynchronously, it is possible that a cheater who releases his share last can obtain the
secret exclusively while honest shareholders cannot. On the
other hand, if all shareholders release their shares simultaneously, the cheater has a probability 1/k of discovering the
secret while the honest participants cannot. In other words,
the secret reconstruction scheme proposed by Tompa and Woll
(1988) works only for synchronous communication channels.
In 1995, Lin and Harn (1995) proposed a fair secret reconstruction scheme. In their scheme, the secret can be
reconstructed as a whole in an asynchronous network.
Furthermore, the secret s is hidden in a sequence,
{d1, … , d j−1, d j, d j+1, … , dk } , where dj = s, and d j+1 = PI , for some j
and PI chosen randomly, where PI is a public information, and
di, for i ≠ j and i ≠ j + 1, are random dummy secrets. They used
the scheme proposed by Rabin and Ben-Or (1989) to verify the
validity of each share. Secret reconstruction process involves
multiple rounds to recover elements of the sequence one at
a time following the order of the sequence. If all shares are valid,
the process continues to recover another secret at the next
round; otherwise, the reconstruction process stops. When the
public information PI is recovered, the previously recovered

secret is the secret. Their scheme allows shares to be released asynchronously. However, if the cheater can correctly
guess the position of the secret, the cheater can obtain the
secret exclusively. The probability of the cheater obtaining the
secret exclusively is 1/k. In 1997, Laih and Lee (1997) proposed a V-fairness (t, n) secret reconstruction scheme and all
shareholders have the same probability of obtaining the secret
without the need of releasing their shares simultaneously. In
their scheme, the dealer divides the secret into multiple subsecrets with different threshold values and generates shares
for each sub-secret. There are some recent papers (Lee, 2011;
Yang et al., 2011) to improve Laih et al.’s scheme. One main
problem of the V-fairness (t, n) secret reconstruction scheme
is that the number of cheaters in this model is limited to be
less than t/2. However, the (t, n) secret reconstruction scheme
can prevent up to t − 1 dishonest shareholders from recovering the secret. These dishonest shareholders can be the same
cheaters in the V-fairness (t, n) secret reconstruction scheme.
Thus, the number of cheaters in the V-fairness (t, n) secret reconstruction is inconsistent with the threshold of the (t, n) secret
reconstruction scheme.
Recently, Tian et al. (2011) proposed a fair secret reconstruction following Gordon et al.’s approach (Gordon et al., 2008)
on complete fairness in secure two-party computation. In the
proposed scheme, the secret is hidden in a sequence of secrets
and the property of consistency of shares is used to detect
cheaters in the secret reconstruction phase. If the cheater can
guess correctly the position of the secret, the probability of the
cheater obtaining the secret exclusively is 1/k. Cheating immune
secret sharing schemes that the cheaters gain no advantage
over honest participants are proposed in Pieprzyk and Zhang
(2001, 2004). In this model, the dealer and the combiner are
assumed to be honest. Participants can cheat during the secret
reconstruction by submitting their fake shares to the combiner. In cheating immune secret sharing scheme, cheaters have
no advantage over honest shareholders. D’Arcoa et al. (2006)
pointed out that a perfect secret sharing scheme cannot be
cheating-immune. All existing cheating immune secret sharing
schemes are prohibitively expensive to be suitable for practical use. In 2013, Tian et al. (2013) proposed a fair threshold SS.
In their scheme, the cheater detection is based on the scheme
proposed by Harn and Lin (2009) which utilizes the redundancy of shares if there are more than t shares available in the
secret reconstruction phase and the fairness is based on a
similar approach proposed by Tompa and Woll (1988) which
utilized a sequence of elements and the secret is hidden in the
sequence. However, Harn (2014a) pointed out that the fair
threshold SS proposed by Tian et al. only works properly in a
synchronous network, but not in an asynchronous network.
In 2004, Halpern and Teague (2004) considered a scenario
in which shareholders in the secret reconstruction are neither
completely honest nor arbitrarily malicious, but instead shareholders are assumed to be rational. A rational shareholder acts
honestly when he cannot gain any advantage over other shareholders (i.e., they will all obtain the secret), but acts dishonestly
when he can gain advantage over others (i.e., he is the only
one to obtain the secret). There are several research papers on
the rational secret sharing (RSS) (Fuchsbauer et al., 2010; Ong et al.,
2009; Tartary et al., 2011; Tian et al., 2015). In fact, the objective of the RSS scheme is to ensure rational shareholders that

journal of information security and applications 23 (2015) 1–7

the secret can be reconstructed successfully. This is the same
as that of the fair secret reconstruction scheme which was originally proposed by Tompa and Woll (1988). In most RSS schemes,
information exchanged among shareholders is restricted to be
in a synchronous channel. There are only a handful papers on
RSS schemes using asynchronous channel. These include
Maleka et al.’s result (Maleka et al., 2008) which requires an
interactive dealer, Fuchsbauer et al.’s work (Fuchsbauer et al.,
2010) which requires cryptographic primitives, Ong et al.’s work
(Ong et al., 2009) and Moses et al.’s result (Moses and Rangan,
2011) which require to assume that certain number of shareholders must be honest.
One common assumption made for most SS schemes including RSS schemes is that all participants are legitimate
shareholders. Therefore, additional process such as VSS is
needed prior to the secret reconstruction. We will propose a
novel approach in this paper. In our proposed scheme, the secret
can only be reconstructed successfully if all participants are
legitimate shareholders. Our secret reconstruction scheme is
based only on shares and it can prevent illegitimate adversary from obtaining the secret because the adversary does not
have any valid share generated by the dealer. Unlike other asynchronous RSS schemes, our proposed scheme is an
asynchronously RSS scheme which does not need any interactive dealer, complicate cryptographic primitives, or any
assumption on the number of honest shareholders.

1.2.

Our contribution

In Shamir’s (t, n) threshold secret sharing scheme, the dealer
uses a linear polynomial of degree t − 1 to generate shares for
shareholders. Shamir’s secret reconstruction scheme considers the situation when all participating users in the secret
reconstruction are legitimate shareholders. In this paper, we
consider secret reconstruction in a practical situation where
inside and outside adversaries may co-exist. The outcome of
our proposed solution can be either a random value (not a real
secret) if there are any adversaries, or the secret if all participants are legitimate shareholders and act honestly.
We summarize main contributions of this paper here.
• Adversaries in the secret reconstruction are divided into two
types: the outside adversary and the inside adversary.
• We propose an asynchronous secret reconstruction scheme
(i.e., it can also be called an asynchronously RSS scheme)
against both inside and outside adversaries.

1.3.

Outline of this paper

In the next section, we describe the model of the secret reconstruction including entities, communication networks,
assumptions and the objectives of the proposed scheme. Then,
in Section 3, we review security of Shamir’s threshold secret
reconstruction scheme and an asynchronous secret reconstruction against any outside adversary which was published
recently (Harn, 2014b). An asynchronous secret reconstruction scheme against both inside and outside adversaries is
proposed in Section 4. Section 5 concludes the paper.

2.

Models

2.1.

Entities

3

Entities in the secret reconstruction phase are classified into
the following types.
• Shareholders: Each shareholder has obtained a valid
share from the dealer initially in the secret reconstruction
phase.
• Participants: Participants are users who participated in the
secret reconstruction phase. Each participant is either an
honest shareholder who owns and presents a valid share
in the secret reconstruction or an adversary who tries to
cheat in the secret reconstruction. In particular, we just focus
on two types of adversaries.
– Outside adversary: The outside adversary is an
attacker who does not own any valid share when
the attacker participated in the secret reconstruction
phase.
– Inside adversary: The inside adversary is a shareholder
who owns a valid share, but releases a fake share in the
secret reconstruction phase. At the same time, the
inside adversary can release his fake share last in an
asynchronous network and reconstruct the secret
exclusively by himself, but other honest shareholders
retrieve a fake secret. The inside adversary is a shareholder who is neither completely honest nor arbitrarily
malicious, but instead the shareholder is assumed to be
rational.
Remarks. In the next section, we will show that Shamir’s
threshold secret reconstruction scheme cannot prevent one
outside attacker from knowing the secret when there are more
than t participants. VSS can be used to detect outside adversary, but it cannot prevent any outside adversary from gaining
access to the secret. This is because the outside adversary is
able to recover the secret from any t valid shares when more
than t participants work together in the secret reconstruction. The objective of a recently proposed secret reconstruction
scheme (Harn, 2014b) is to ensure that the secret cannot be
reconstructed successfully when any outside adversary is participated in the secret reconstruction.

2.2.

Communication channels

Throughout this paper, we assume that all information are communicated asynchronously. In this type of communication,
adversaries can always take advantage by releasing their shares
last.

2.3.

Assumptions

The following assumptions are used in the design of our proposed secret reconstruction scheme.
• We assume that j participants, where t ≤ j ≤ n, work together to recover the secret in the secret reconstruction
phase.

4

journal of information security and applications 23 (2015) 1–7

• Each participant uses his share(s) to compute one value and
send this value to all other participants. There is no need
of the dealer in the secret reconstruction.
• The recovered secret is computed based on j exchanged
values among participants.
• Each participant is responsible to reconstruct the secret by
him/herself without the need of a combiner.
• Participants do not need to know who are legitimate shareholders. The outcome of a secret reconstruction depends
only on their shares.

2.4.
Objectives of our proposed secret reconstruction
scheme
There are two secret reconstruction schemes in this paper.
The first scheme, Scheme 1, proposed recently (Harn, 2014b)
is able to prevent attacks from any outside adversary and
the second scheme, Scheme 2, which incorporates Scheme 1,
is able to prevent attacks from both inside and outside
adversaries.
In the secret reconstruction, an outside adversary acts as
a regular shareholder. In Section 4, we review a newly proposed secret reconstruction, called as Scheme 1, based on a
simple modification of Shamir’s scheme against outside adversary. The objective of Scheme 1 is given in the following
definition.
Definition 1. (The objective of Scheme 1). Scheme 1 is to ensure
that under the assumption that all shareholders act honestly (i.e.,
there is no inside adversary), either (a) all participants recover the
secret if all participants are shareholder or (b) no one can recover
the secret if there are outside adversaries.
In an asynchronous secret reconstruction, an inside adversary may release a fake share last after knowing the shares
of other honest shareholders. In doing so, the inside adversary can exclusively reconstruct the secret, but other honest
shareholders retrieve a fake secret. Secret reconstruction
scheme which resists both inside and outside attacks cannot
be found in the literature. In Section 5, we introduce a new
secret reconstruction, called as Scheme 2, using a spacefairness trade-off technique and the technique in Scheme 1
to prevent attacks from both inside and outside adversaries.
The objective of Scheme 2 is given in the following
definition.
Definition 2. (The objective of Scheme 2). Scheme 2 is to ensure
that either (a) all participants recover the secret if all participants
are shareholders and they act honestly or (b) no one can recover the
secret if there are either outside adversaries or any shareholder acts
dishonestly.

3.
Review of asynchronous secret
reconstruction against outside adversary
In Shamir’s (t, n) threshold secret sharing scheme, there are n
shareholders U = {U1, … , Un } and a dealer D and this scheme
consists of two phases.

Scheme: Shamir’s (t, n) threshold secret sharing scheme
Share generation phase
Dealer D randomly picks a linear polynomial f(x) with
degree t − 1: f ( x ) = a0 + a1 x + … + at −1 xt −1 , such that the
secret is s = a0, where all coefficients ai, i = 1, … , t − 1 , are
in the finite field Fp = GF ( p) , and s ∈ Fp = GF ( p). D does
compute n shares {s1, s2, … , sn } as:

si = f (i) , i = 1 … , n.
Then, the dealer sends each share si to the corresponding shareholder Ui via a secure channel.
Secret reconstruction phase
Assume that t shareholders, such as R = {U1, U2, … , Ut } ,
want to reconstruct the secret s. Shareholders in the set
R reveal their shares and reconstruct the secret via using
the Lagrange interpolating formula as follows.
t
⎛ t
−r ⎞
s = f (0 ) = ∑ f ( j ) ⎜ ∏
(mod p).
j
⎝ r =1,r ≠ j − r ⎟⎠
j =1

Shamir’s (t, n) scheme satisfies security requirements of the
threshold secret sharing scheme, that are, (a) with knowledge of any t or more than t shares can reconstruct the secret
s, and (b) with knowledge of fewer than t shares cannot get
any information about the secret s. Shamir’s scheme is unconditionally secure since the scheme satisfies these two
requirements without making any computational assumption (see Shamir, 1979 for more details).
During secret reconstruction, participating users can be
either legitimate shareholders or outside adversaries. Shamir’s
scheme only considers the situation when all participating users
are legitimate shareholders. When more than t users work together and are participated in the secret reconstruction phase
and shares are released asynchronously, an outside adversary can always release his share last. After knowing t valid
shares of legitimate shareholders, since the secret polynomial, having degree t − 1, the outside adversary can reconstruct
the secret. Furthermore, the attacker can successfully forge a
valid share on the polynomial without being detected. Thus,
Shamir’s (t, n) threshold secret sharing is no longer secure if
more than t users are participating in the secret reconstruction phase.
Recently, an asynchronous secret reconstruction (Harn,
2014b), Scheme 1, against outside adversary has been proposed. The main difference between Scheme 1 and Shamir’s
(t, n) threshold secret sharing scheme is that in Scheme 1, (a)
instead of selecting a single polynomial as in Shamir’s (t, n)
threshold secret sharing scheme, the dealer selects multiple
polynomials with degree t − 1, and (b) instead of hiding the
secret in the constant term of the polynomial in Shamir’s (t,
n) threshold secret sharing scheme, the secret is a linear combination of multiple points of the polynomials. The basic idea
of Scheme 1 is that the dealer follows Shamir’s (t, n) threshold secret sharing scheme to pick k random polynomials, fi(x),
i = 1, 2, … , k , where kt > n − 1 (this condition enables the total

journal of information security and applications 23 (2015) 1–7

of coefficients in k random polynomials are no less than n participants), and each polynomial has degree t − 1 and the dealer
generates shares, fi(xr), i = 1, 2, … , k, for each shareholder Ur,
r = 1, 2, … , n . For any secret, s, the dealer picks integers, wi, zi,
in GF(p) where zi ∉{x1, … , xn }, where xr is the public information of shareholder Ur, and zi ≠ zu for any i and u, such that
s = ∑ ki =1 wi fi (zi ) (mod p) . The dealer publicly reveals all integers, wi, zi, i = 1, 2, … , k. The additive sum of shares, ∑ ki =1 wi fi (zi ) ,
is a share of the additive polynomial ∑ ki =1 wi fi ( x ) since Shamir’s
scheme is homomorphic. When there are j shareholders where
t ≤ j ≤ n, for example, {U1, U2, … , U j }, in the secret reconstruction phase, each shareholder Ur uses his shares, fi(xr), where
i = 1, 2, … , k , to evaluate and release one Lagrange component,

5

to release his Lagrange component, the outside adversary
cannot compute the secret polynomials, fi(x), i = 1, 2, … , k, from
previously released Lagrange components. Detailed discussion can be found in Harn (2014b).
Remark 1. Scheme 1 cannot prevent an inside adversary to gain
advantage over honest shareholders. This is because the inside
adversary can be the last one to release a fake Lagrange component in an asynchronous network. In the next section, we
use both the space-fairness trade-off technique and the technique in Scheme 1 to propose an asynchronous reconstruction
scheme to prevent both inside and outside adversaries from
taking advantage over honest shareholders.

cr = ∑ ki = 1 wi fi ( xr ) ∏lj= 1,l ≠ r xzri −−xxll (mod p) , to all other shareholders.
Finally, each shareholder can recover the secret as s = ∑ rj =1 cr
after they knew cr, r = 1, 2, … , j .
Scheme 1: Asynchronous secret reconstruction against
outside adversary (Harn, 2014b)
Share generation phase
Dealer D randomly picks k polynomials, f i (x), for
i = 1, 2, … , k, where kt > n − 1, and each polynomial has
degree t − 1: fi ( x ) = ai,0 + ai,1 x + … + ai,t −1 xt −1, such that the
secret s = ∑ ki =1 wi fi (zi ) (mod p) and all coefficients
ai,0, ai,1, … , ai,t −1 and wi, zi, are in the finite field Fp = GF ( p)
with p > s (that is s ∈ Fp = GF ( p)) and zi ∉{x1, … , xn }, xr is
the public information of shareholder Ur, and zi ≠ zu for
any i and u. For every shareholder Ur with public information xr, D computes k shares, fi(xr), i = 1, 2, … , k. Then,
dealer distributes shares, fi(xr), i = 1, 2, … , k, to corresponding shareholder U r secretly. Dealer makes w i , z i ,
i = 1, 2, … , k, publicly known.
Secret reconstruction phase
1. Each participant Ur uses his shares, fi(xr), i = 1, 2, … , k,
to compute cr = ∑ ki = 1 wi fi ( xr ) ∏lj= 1,l ≠ r xzri −−xxll (mod p) and
sends cr to all other participants.
2. Each participant computes as follows after he/she knew
all cr, for r = 1, 2, … , j .
j

s′ = ∑ cr (mod p).
r =1

The secret can be recovered successfully if participants are
all honest shareholders and act honestly to reveal their Lagrange
components in Scheme 1. In fact, the secret shares, fi(xr),
i = 1, 2, … , k, are protected unconditionally in the released
Lagrange component, cr. Since any released Lagrange component c r is a linear combination of private shares, f i (x r ),
i = 1, 2, … , k , it is impossible to obtain any private share from
any released Lagrange component cr. The outside adversaries
do not have enough number of Lagrange components to recover
the secret. On the other hand, each released Lagrange component is a linear function of kt coefficients of polynomials,
fi ( x ) = ai,0 + ai,1 x + … + ai,t −1 xt −1 , i = 1, 2, … , k, and each polynomial has degree t − 1. If the outside adversary is the last one

4.
Asynchronous secret reconstruction
against both inside and outside adversaries
The basic idea of our proposed scheme to prevent an inside
adversary to gain advantage over honest shareholders is that
the dealer hides the secret vq in a sequence of k secrets,
{v1, v2, … , vq−1, vq, vq+1, … , vk } , where vq+1 is the “flag” used to indicate the position of the secret. Dealer follows Scheme 1 to
select k secrets and generate private shares for all shareholders. Dealer also publishes the one-way values, H(vr), r = 1, 2, … , k ,
to enable shareholders to detect fake shares in the secret reconstruction process. In the process, participants work together
to reconstruct secrets one at a time. If there is any fake share
in the process, the fake share can be detected and the secret
reconstruction process is stopped. Therefore, no one recover
the secret. On the other hand, the secret reconstruction process
proceeds until reconstructing the flag vq+1 if there is no fake
share in the process. When the flag is reconstructed, all shareholders have already obtained the secret since the secret is the
one that has been previously reconstructed.
Scheme 2: Asynchronous secret reconstruction against
both inside and outside adversaries
Share generation phase
The dealer needs to select k secrets {v1, … , vk } satisfying v1 > v2 > … > vq−1 > vq < vq+ 1 , where vq is the secret and
each vr is a random integer in GF(p) r = 1, 2, … , k , r ≠ q. For
each secret, vr, D follows share generation algorithm of
Scheme 1 to compute shares and distribute every share
to corresponding shareholder U i privately where
i = 1, 2, … , n . At the end, every shareholder has received
k shares from the dealer. Dealer computes H(v r ),
r = 1, 2, … , k , where H is a collision-resistant one-way function (Goldreich, 2001), and makes H(v r ), r = 1, 2, … , k ,
publicly known. Note that the public-known one-way value
H(vr) is used to detect cheaters in the secret reconstruction process.
Secret reconstruction phase
Participants work together to reconstruct the
secrets
{v1, … , vk } in the following order,
v1 → v2 → … → vq−1 → vq → vq+ 1 → … → vk , one at a time.

6

journal of information security and applications 23 (2015) 1–7

1. For each secret vr, r = 1, 2, … , k , participants follow the
secret reconstruction algorithm of Scheme 1 to reconstruct the secret.
2. After each secret vr being recovered, participants check
whether the one-way value of the recovered secret is
equivalent to the published value H(vr).
– If the checking is successful, participants compare
the recovered secret with the previously recovered
secret.
• If the recovered secret is greater than the previously recovered secret, the secret is the previously
recovered secret and the secret reconstruction
process is stopped.
• Otherwise, continue to recover the next secret in
the sequence.
– If the checking fails, the secret reconstruction process
is stopped.

Lemma 1. In Scheme 2, the probability that anyone can correctly
guess the position of the secret in the sequence is 1/k where k is the
number of secrets in the sequence.
Proof. In Scheme 2, the secret vq is hidden in the sequence,

{v1, … , vk } by the dealer during system set up. Thus, the prob-

by increasing the length of sequence. In summary, Scheme 2
is able to prevent attack from any inside adversary since the
probability 1/k can be almost ignored if k is large enough. For
the other two cases, no one gets the secret for case (a) and everyone gets the secret for case (c). There exists a minor
advantage for the inside adversary in these two cases. The adversary knows exactly whether the failure of checking in
Scheme 2 is caused by either case (a) or case (c), but honest
shareholders cannot differentiate these two cases. However,
the result of these two cases, either no one gets the secret or
every one gets the secret, satisfies the objective of fairness as
we have defined in Section 2. □

5.

Conclusion

In this paper, adversaries in the secret reconstruction are classified into two types: the outside adversary and the inside
adversary. The former is a participant who does not own any
valid share, but impersonates to be a shareholder and tries to
reconstruct the secret, and the latter is a shareholder, but releases a fake share. We propose an asynchronous secret
reconstruction scheme to protect the secret against both inside
and outside adversaries.

ability that anyone can correctly guess the position of the secret
in the sequence is 1/k. □
Theorem 1. Scheme 2 is able to prevent attacks from both inside
adversaries and outside adversaries with very high successful probability if k is a large integer.
Proof. Since Scheme 1 is used by the dealer to generate shares
of secrets, it can prevent any outside adversary to recover any
secret in the sequence. In other words, Scheme 2 can detect
any outside adversary successfully. On the other hand, in
Scheme 2, when there is no cheater and all participants are
legitimate shareholders in the reconstruction process, the secret
reconstruction process proceeds until reconstructing vq+1 . Once
vq+1 is recovered, all participants have already obtained the
secret which is the previously recovered secret. On the other
hand, when there is an inside adversary in the reconstruction process and the inside adversary releases his fake share
last in Scheme 2, the cheating can be detected since
H (vr′ ) ≠ H (vr ) and the reconstruction process is stopped. We
can classify the occurrences of cheats into three different categories: (a) if the secret reconstruction process is stopped before
it reaches the round to reconstruct the secret vq, then no one
can obtain the secret. (b) If the secret reconstruction process
is stopped at the round to reconstruct vq and the inside adversary presents a fake share, then the inside adversary obtains
the secret exclusively, but not by other honest shareholders.
And (c) if the secret reconstruction process is stopped at the
round to reconstruct vq+1 , then all participants obtain the secret
since the secret has already been reconstructed at the previous round. Among these three categories, only (b) fails to prevent
the inside adversary from taking advantage over other honest
participants. In this case, the inside adversary needs to guess
correctly about the position of the secret in the sequence. According to Lemma 1, the probability of this guess can be reduced

Acknowledgements
This research is supported in part by the National Natural
Science Foundation of China under Grant Nos. 61103247,
U1405255 and 61472032, Natural Science Foundation of Fujian
Province under Grant No. 2015J01239, Fujian Provincial Key Laboratory of Network Security and Cryptology Research Fund
(Fujian Normal University) (No. 15007) and Key Laboratory of
Information Security of ZhongBan Research Fund (Beijing Electronic Science & Technology Institute) (No. 2014KF-CHY).

REFERENCES

Blakley GR. Safeguarding cryptographic keys. In: Proceedings of
AFIPS ‘79 nat. computer conf, vol. 48. AFIPS Press; 1979. p.
313–17.
Brickell EF, Stinson DR. The detection of cheaters in threshold
schemes. In: Advances in cryptology — crypto ‘88, LNCS 403.
Springer-Verlag; 1990. p. 564–77.
Chor B, Goldwasser S, Micali S, Awerbuch B. Secret sharing and
achieving simultaneously in the presence of faults. In:
Proceedings of 26th IEEE symp. on foundations of computer
science. IEEE; 1985. p. 383–95.
D’Arcoa P, Kishimotob W, Stinson DR. Properties and constraints
of cheating-immune secret sharing schemes. Discrete Appl
Math 2006;154(2):219–33.
Feldman P. A practical scheme for non-interactive verifiable
secret sharing. In: Proceedings of 28th IEEE symp. on
foundations of computer science. IEEE; 1978. p. 427–37.
Fuchsbauer G, Katz J, Naccache D. Efficient rational secret
sharing in standard communication networks. In:
Proceedings of the 7th theory of cryptography conference —
TCC ‘10, LNCS 5978. Springer-Verlag; 2010. p. 419–36.

journal of information security and applications 23 (2015) 1–7

Goldreich O. Foundations of cryptography, vol. 1. Basic tools.
Cambridge University Press; 2001.
Gordon SD, Hazay C, Katz J, Lindell Y. Complete fairness in
secure two-party computation. In: Proceeding of 40th ACM
symp. on the theory of computing — STOC ‘08. ACM Press;
2008. p. 413–22.
Halpern J, Teague V. Rational secret sharing and multiparty
computation: extended abstract. In: Proceedings of the thirtysixth annual ACM symposium on theory of computing —
STOC ‘04. ACM Press; 2004. p. 623–32.
Harn L. Comments on “Fair (t, n) threshold secret sharing
scheme”. IET Inf Secur 2014a;8(6):303–4.
Harn L. Secure secret reconstruction and multi-secret sharing
schemes with unconditional security. Security Comm.
Netwoks 2014b;7(3):567–73.
Harn L, Lin CL. Detection and identification of cheaters in (t, n)
secret sharing scheme. Des Codes Crypt 2009;52(1):15–24.
Harn L, Lin CL. Strong (n, t, n) verifiable secret sharing scheme. Inf
Sci (Ny) 2010;180(16):3059–64.
Katz J, Koo C, Kumaresan R. Improved the round complexity of
VSS in point-to-point networks. In: ICALP 2008. Part II, LNCS
5126. Springer-Verlag; 2008. p. 499–510.
Laih CS, Lee YC. V-fairness (t, n) secret sharing scheme. In:
Proceedings of IEE conference on computers and digital
techniques. IEEE; 1997. p. 245–8.
Lee YC. A simple (v, t, n)-fairness secret sharing scheme with one
shadow for each participant. In: Proceedings of WISM 2011.
Part I, LNCS 6987. Springer-Verlag; 2011. p. 384–9.
Lin HY, Harn L. Fair reconstruction of a secret. Inf Proc Lett
1995;55(1):45–7.
Maleka S, Shareef A, Rangan CP. Rational secret sharing
with repeated games. In: Proceedings of the 4th
international information security practice and experience
conference — ISPEC ‘08, LNCS 4991. Springer-Verlag; 2008.
p. 334–46.
Moses WK Jr, Rangan CP. Rational secret sharing over an
asynchronous broadcast channel with information theoretic
security. Int J Netw Secur Appl 2011;3(6):1–18.

7

Ong SJ, Parkes DC, Rosen A, Vadhan SP. Fairness with an honest
minority and a rational majority. In: Proceedings of the 6th
theory of cryptography conference — TCC ‘09, LNCS 5444.
Springer-Verlag; 2009. p. 419–36.
Pedersen TP. Non-interactive and information-theoretic secure
verifiable secret sharing. In: Advances in cryptology — crypto
‘91, LNCS 576. Springer-Verlag; 1992. p. 129–40.
Pieprzyk J, Zhang XM. Cheating prevention in secret sharing over
GF(pt). In: Proceedings of indocrypt 2001. LNCS 2247. SpringerVerlag; 2001. p. 79–90.
Pieprzyk J, Zhang XM. On cheating immune secret sharing.
Discrete Math Theor Comput Sci 2004;6(2):253–64.
Rabin T, Ben-Or M. Verifiable secret sharing and multiparty
schemes with honest majority. In: Proceedings of the 21th
ACM symp. on the theory of computing. ACM Press; 1989. p.
73–85.
Shamir A. How to share a secret. Commun ACM 1979;22(11):612–
13.
Tartary C, Wang HX, Zhang Y. An efficient and information
theoretically secure rational secret sharing scheme based on
symmetric bivariate polynomials. Int J Found Comput Sci
2011;22(6):1395–416.
Tian Y, Ma J, Peng C, Zhu J. Secret sharing scheme with fairness.
In: Proceedings of 2011 international joint conference
of IEEE TrustCom-11/IEEE ICESS-11/FCST-11. IEEE; 2011. p. 494–
500.
Tian Y, Ma J, Peng C, Jiang Q. Fair (t, n) threshold secret sharing
scheme. IET Inf Secur 2013;7(2):106–12.
Tian Y, Peng C, Lin D, Ma J, Jiang Q, Ji W. Bayesian mechanism for
rational secret sharing scheme. Sci China Inf Sci 2015;58(5):1–
13.
Tompa M, Woll H. How to share a secret with cheaters. J Cryptol
1988;1(3):133–8.
Yang JH, Chang CC, Wang CH. An efficient V-fairness (t, n)
threshold secret sharing scheme. In: Proceedings of the fifth
international conference on genetic and evolutionary
computing. IEEE; 2011. p. 180–3.

