Robotics and Autonomous Systems 73 (2015) 4–15

Contents lists available at ScienceDirect

Robotics and Autonomous Systems
journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/robot

Ankle–knee prosthesis with active ankle and energy transfer:
Development of the CYBERLEGs Alpha-Prosthesis✩
Louis Flynn a,∗ , Joost Geeroms a , Rene Jimenez-Fabian a , Bram Vanderborght a ,
Nicola Vitiello b,c , Dirk Lefeber a
a

Department of Mechanical Engineering, Vrije Universiteit Brussel, Pleinlaan 2, Brussels, Belgium

b

The BioRobotics Institute, Scuola Superiore Sant’Anna, viale Rinaldo Piaggio 34, Pisa, Italy

c

Don Carlo Gnocchi Foundation, via di Scandicci 256, 50143, Firenze, Italy

highlights
•
•
•
•
•

We designed a new Knee–Ankle Prosthesis with energy transfer from knee to ankle.
The ankle is a variable stiffness actuator based on the MACCEPA architecture.
The prosthesis attempts to produce a natural level-ground gait.
The behavior of the ankle joint and locking mechanisms is investigated.
The energy transfer mechanism reduces the peak torque at the ankle joint.

article

info

Article history:
Available online 27 December 2014
Keywords:
Prosthesis
Knee
Ankle
Energy efficiency
Transfemoral
CYBERLEGs
Active
Energy transfer

abstract
This paper presents the development of the CYBERLEGs Alpha-Prototype prosthesis, a new transfemoral
prosthesis incorporating a new variable stiffness ankle actuator based on the MACCEPA architecture, a
passive knee with two locking mechanisms, and an energy transfer mechanism that harvests negative
work from the knee and delivers it to the ankle to assist pushoff. The CYBERLEGs Alpha-Prosthesis is part of
the CYBERLEGs FP7-ICT project, which combines a prosthesis system to replace a lost limb in parallel with
an exoskeleton to assist the sound leg, and sensory array to control both systems. The prosthesis attempts
to produce a natural level ground walking gait that approximates the joint torques and kinematics of a
non-amputee while maintaining compliant joints, which has the potential to decrease impulsive losses,
and ultimately reduce the end user energy consumption. This first prototype consists of a passive knee and
an active ankle which are energetically coupled to reduce the total power consumption of the device. Here
we present simulations of the actuation system of the ankle and the passive behavior of the knee module
with and without the energy transfer effects, the mechanical design of the prosthesis, and empirical
results from testing of the physical device with amputee subjects.
© 2014 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

1. Introduction
The number of people who have undergone a lower limb amputation has risen worldwide during the recent decades [1], mostly

✩ A preliminary version of this paper was presented at the Wearable Robotics
Workshop, Neurotechnix 2013.
∗ Corresponding author.
E-mail addresses: lflynn@vub.ac.be (L. Flynn), jgeeroms@vub.ac.be
(J. Geeroms), rjimenez@vub.ac.be (R. Jimenez-Fabian),
bram.vanderborght@vub.ac.be (B. Vanderborght), n.vitiello@sssup.it (N. Vitiello),
dlefeber@vub.ac.be (D. Lefeber).

http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.robot.2014.12.013
0921-8890/© 2014 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

victims of cardiovascular diseases, trauma, malignancy, or congenital limb defects. In developed countries, this increase is primarily attributed to a rise in vascular diseases, particularly diabetes
related amputations, where a higher activity level and faster recovery of mobility may be helpful to maintain health of the patient [2]. This recovery is impeded by the large efforts needed to use
conventional prostheses, both physically and cognitively, at a time
when the patient is most weak. The increased metabolic costs, increased forces, and abnormal gait kinematics associated with using
standard passive prostheses are well known (for example [3–6])
and make it difficult for weaker individuals to use passive pros-

L. Flynn et al. / Robotics and Autonomous Systems 73 (2015) 4–15

theses. The CYBERLEGs FP7-ICT1 project looks to solve this problem through the use of an active prosthesis, the topic of this paper,
paired with an active orthotic exoskeleton being developed concurrently. It is believed that the complete system will be able to
reduce the metabolic and cognitive costs of performing actions for
the user of the system.
Recent years have witnessed the commercialization of a number of active prostheses designed to restore the full ankle [7,8] and
knee [9] joint capability during normal walking, as well as provide
some slope walking, sit to stand, and stair climbing operations. In
addition to the newest commercial models, there are a number of
active ankle [10–13] and knee modules [14], as well as combined
ankle–knee systems [15] under development, seeking to improve
functionality and reduce energy consumption of both the device
and the individual. These new devices have been spurred by developments in materials, electric motors, batteries, and miniaturized controllers, combined with actuators that are better suited to
biomechanical use [16–18]. All of the modern ankle prostheses utilize some sort of passive compliance in their ankle designs. For example, the Vanderbilt prosthesis [15] uses a parallel spring in its
ankle actuator to reduce the peak force required by the actuator to
approximate normal gait torques, the SpringActive Odyssey [19]
utilizes a series spring which it loads during stance and unloads
during pushoff, and the BiOM [20] utilizes both to provide a combination of these effects. The AMP Foot 2.0 [10], developed at the
Vrije Universiteit Brussel, uses a different combination of series
spring systems and can explosively inject energy into the system
using a four-bar linkage as a locking mechanism. Most importantly,
some of these active prostheses have shown significant improvement in gait kinematics when compared to a passive prosthesis,
and one powered ankle prosthesis has shown a metabolic energy
performance equal to that of a normal walker [21]. It should also
be noted that Herr and Grabowski of [21] speculate that with additional development it should be possible to reduce the metabolic
cost of an amputee walking on level ground to below that of a nonamputee.
There is a growing number of existing active knee systems,
but only the Ossur Power Knee [9] is commercially available on
the market. Current knees in development include the MIT agonist–antagonist [14] and CSEA [22] knees, a screw driven knee
from University of Sakarya [23], and Hebei University of Technology [24]. The Vanderbilt knee–ankle prosthesis is currently the
only tested, active, combined ankle–knee prosthesis in the research stages of development [15]. The knee design of [15] is a rigid
actuation model, where the joint has no intrinsic series or parallel
compliance. The Power Knee [9] has a stiff spring in series with the
drive motor, and the MIT knees also utilize compliant systems in
their actuation.
Most prosthetic devices treat the knee and ankle as separate
systems for commercial benefits and simplicity of design, while
in humans there are clear connections between joints through
biarticular muscles. The CYBERLEGs Alpha-Prosthesis attempts to
recreate these types of connections between the knee and ankle
in an active prosthesis. Because the knee performs primarily negative work during normal walking, the energy that would normally
be dissipated can be used for powering pushoff. Although not common, there are a few passive designs that have attempted knee and
ankle energy transfer. For example the HydraCadence [25] from the
1950s (and still available today) utilizes a passive hydraulic system
that uses knee flexion during swing phase to provide ankle dorsi-

5

flexion, effectively transferring energy from the knee to the ankle,
but not providing high levels of work and providing no additional
energy to the ankle during pushoff. Designs of VUB HEKTA [26] and
the University of Twente [27] passively transfer energy that would
be dissipated by the knee (13 J for an 80 kg person), to the ankle
through thoughtful use of mechanical linkages and springs. This is
beneficial since the ankle requires around 18 J during pushoff. This
concept of energy transfer between joints has not yet been incorporated into active designs.
The CYBERLEGs Alpha-Prosthesis is a new knee–ankle system
consisting of an active ankle and passive knee, paired with a novel
energy transfer system between the knee and the ankle. The system is designed to be able to closely reproduce the full normal gait
joint torques for an 80 kg person during normal walking at a lower
electrical cost than a directly driven prosthetic system. The actuated ankle is a new, highly compliant, MACCEPA-based [28], variable stiffness actuator capable of providing positive. The knee consists of two springs, one of which can be activated using a small
servomotor, to passively approximate the torque–angle characteristics. The energy transfer system is a cable that is locked and unlocked with a second small servomotor, directly coupling the knee
and ankle during specific times in the gait cycle. The components
were then characterized and tested with sound patients using a
bent-knee cast and finally used in amputee trials. Here we present
the simulation of both the ankle and the knee, mechanical design
decisions that were made based on the simulations, initial tests of
the CYBERLEGs Alpha-Prosthesis, and discussion and comparison
of the behavior of the new system as an integral part of the CYBERLEGs FP7-ICT project.
2. Theory of operation
During normal walking the ankle needs to produce around 18 J
positive work per stride. This can be provided through the use of
a powered prosthesis, but directly coupling a drive to the joint
output requires motors that can provide over 300 W and torques
of around 130 N m. The power requirement of an actuated ankle
can be greatly reduced through the use of a Series-Elastic Actuator (SEA) [29] because the work needed for ankle push off can be
injected over a longer time and stored in the elastic element until
used, which is not possible in a directly driven system.
The knee, on the other hand, has a net braking effect, needing to
dissipate around 13 J per step. This energy is generally dissipated
in current state of the art prostheses through the use of a passive
damper, such as the Mauch knee [9], or in an active microprocessor
controlled damper, such as the C-Leg [30] or Rheo [9] knees. In the
Alpha-Prosthesis, the energy is stored in springs to be used at different times during the gait cycle. Through the use of a connection
between the knee and the ankle, it becomes energetically interesting to capture the excess work at the knee because it can be used
to power the ankle. The major issue is that the negative work at
the knee does not always coincide with the times the ankle needs
the most energy and therefore the knee needs a method to store
and release energy at the correct time, necessitating the use of a
locking mechanism.
Here we present the theory and simulation of the ankle and
knee systems independently, and finally in combination with the
energy transfer mechanism.
2.1. Ankle

1 The CYBERnetic LowEr-Limb CoGnitive Ortho-prosthesis. The project aims
for the development of an artificial cognitive ortho-prosthesis system for the
replacement of the lost lower limb of dysvascular transfemoral amputees and to
provide assistance to the remaining sound limb. The final prototype will allow
the amputee to walk, use stairs and move from sit-to-stand and stand-to-sit with
limited cognitive and energetic efforts www.cyberlegs.eu.

During level ground walking, the ankle joint requires a positive
joint work of approximately 18 J per step for an 80 kg individual
walking at 1 stride/s. It is first assumed that this energy will be
provided solely through a MACCEPA based actuator, a variable
compliance, series elastic actuator well suited for biologically

6

L. Flynn et al. / Robotics and Autonomous Systems 73 (2015) 4–15

Fig. 1. Configuration of a MACCEPA using rigid linkages. The main motor (M) is
attached to the anchored link and drives the moment arm (b) around the ankle joint
(a). The moment arm is displaced by an angle α , compressing the MACCEPA spring
along the foot shaft (C), creating an ankle torque. The small motor (m) is used to
precompress the main spring, and is attached to the foot link. Technical realization
in Fig. 11.

inspired robots [28,18]. A schematic of the design can be found
in Fig. 1 and the corresponding realization of the design can be
found in Fig. 11 in Section 3.1. This architecture was chosen not
only because of the overall behavior of the system, but also to solve
some practical problems with previous designs, such as the ability
to use compression springs and to remove cables which had been
a point of failure of previous designs.
In this schematic the anchored segment represents the shank
of the leg, and the main motor M drives the moment arm B around
joint a. This motion pulls the linkage A, driving the linearly constrained slider b and compressing the spring k. The torque generated by the actuator is then dependent on only the displacement
α and the initial spring pretension P, which is determined by the
pretension motor (m).
The output torque developed by the actuator is given by
T (α, P ) = C (α)f (α, P ),


C (α) = B cos α + A 1 −



B
A

sin α

2 1/2
(2)

and the perpendicular force to the foot shaft, f (α, P ), defined as
kB(P + A + B − C (α)) sin α



A 1−

B
A

Table 1
Selected ankle characteristics used in simulation and for final design.
Motors
Property

Value

Units

Moment arm length (B)
Linkage length (A)
Spring constant (k)
Shoe size
Gear ratio
Torque output

10
10
130 000
42
860:1
130

mm
mm
N/m
EU
Nm

(1)

which is the product of the distance along the foot shaft, C , defined
as

f (α, P ) =

Fig. 2. Ankle stiffness in terms of α . The stiffness of the ankle joint automatically
increases as the moment arm is displaced from the neutral position, as happens in
a natural ankle.

sin α

2 1/2

(3)

where f (α, P ) is the force acting on b perpendicular to ab. Note that
B/A < 1 should be satisfied to avoid a singularity at α = 90°.
As the displacement of the moment arm becomes larger the actuator naturally stiffens, which is similar to the natural behavior of
the ankle. The torque of the joint can reach well over 130 N m and
increases in stiffness from almost no stiffness around the neutral
position, α = 0, to around 15 N m/° at high deflection and moderate (9 mm) pretension, as can be seen in Fig. 2. The selected final
values used for the calculations, and eventually for the final design,
can be found in Table 1. These values were determined through the
following power simulations (Section 2.1.1) as well as the dimensional constraints for the foot actuator.
2.1.1. Ankle simulations
The ankle simulations are done in two parts, the first looks at
the actuator output given the biomechanical data, and the second
matches a motor to the requirements from the actuator.
To understand the actuator output requirements, desired
torque, τWinter , and desired ankle joint positions, θWinter , were determined from biomechanical data of healthy gait from Winter [31]

assuming an 80 kg individual walking at 1 stride/s. These were then
used to calculate the required moment arm trajectory, in terms
of α , at every moment in time over a single stride by solving the
inverse of Eq. (1), where T (α, P ) = τWinter , the desired torque
trajectory. Note that because the power of the output of the motor is the power to be optimized, the motion of the moment arm
with respect to the shank, φ = θWinter + α , with the offset where
φ0 = θWinter 0 = α0 = 0, is used to calculate the moment arm velocity, as shown in Eq. (4). The definitions for the different angles
α, φ, and θ can be found in Fig. 1.
The shank referenced desired moment arm angle trajectory and
velocity are then used to calculate required actuator output power,
T ∗ dtd (φ). Because motor size is highly correlated with motor
power, the spring constant and pretension length were optimized
to minimize peak actuator power. The optimization problem is
defined as





d

arg min max T ∗
(φ)
t
dt
stride
k,P

50 000 < k < 250 000 N/m
s.t . 0 < P < 20 mm
|τWinter − T | < δ


(4)

where T is the output joint torque of the actuator and tstride is the
time from initial heel contact to the end of the stride. A parameter substitution search, as was successfully used in [32], was performed to find local minimums in peak actuator power, given the
parameters of pretension distance, P, and MACCEPA series spring
stiffness, k as shown in Fig. 3. The step resolution of the pretension
was 1 mm and of the series spring stiffness was 10 000 N/m.
The main MACCEPA spring constant was selected by choosing
a spring that had a peak power minimum near the center of the

L. Flynn et al. / Robotics and Autonomous Systems 73 (2015) 4–15

7

Fig. 3. A surface showing the peak positive work of the actuator given the
MACCEPA spring constant and pretension. The red line shows the path of the
selected spring (130 000 N/m), with a minimum of 111 W around 7 mm pretension.
The peak power requirement remains relatively low over the range of pretension
that the ankle is able to produce. (For interpretation of the references to color in this
figure legend, the reader is referred to the web version of this article.)

range of pretension that the device would be capable of producing
(maximum pretension is around 20 mm), while keeping the peak
power variation low over the entire pretension range. The ultimate
spring constant that was used was determined by commercially
available springs that fit the dimensions of the application.
Peak motor power was reduced from the 304 W needed for a
stiff direct drive system, to around 111 W. The power, torque, and
position characteristics required to track the typical biological ankle torque with the MACCEPA actuator are shown in Fig. 4. Note
that increasing the pretension length increases the peak power
slightly due to a change in the timing of the motion of the moment arm, but also dramatically reduces the required motor velocity, which has large implications for the selection of the motor.
Using these moment arm trajectories and torque requirements,
motor properties and gear ratios were selected. A Simulink model
of the motor and MACCEPA actuator was created, using a controller similar to the system used in testing and in walking trials,
as in Fig. 5. The kinematics of the ankle joint and moment arm
were commanded to track those of the Winter data and moment
arm simulations from Fig. 4 and the output torque was calculated.
The torque of the actuator was determined for three different motor/gearbox combinations. The first was a high velocity system,
with a high power motor (200 W) and low gear ratio (14:1) gearbox. This is not an energy efficient system, but should be able to
provide the best bandwidth, if the motor drivers can provide the
current. The second is a high power motor, with a higher gearbox
ratio (86:1). The third system was the one that was ultimately used
in the prosthesis, a low power (60 W) motor with a high (86:1)
gearbox. Note that all of the combinations can reach torques within
the standard deviation of the Winter ankle torque data.
For this method to produce torques and kinematics similar to a
human gait, we must assume that our prosthesis has similar mass
and inertia properties to the human leg otherwise it generates
different dynamics, especially during the swing phase.
2.2. Knee
The knee is composed of three primarily passive components,
the Baseline Spring (BL), the Weight Acceptance (WA), and the Energy Transfer (ET) systems. The combination of these three systems can create a torque–angle characteristic that mimics the natural torque–angle relationship of a normal knee. In the quasi-static
analysis that has been used for this prosthesis, the resultant torque

Fig. 4. Power, torque and position characteristics of the ankle MACCEPA actuator
tracking average normal gait characteristics. The power can be seen to be reduced
from 304 to 111 W in the first graph. The difference in peak power between
no pretension and 7 mm pretension is small (around 2 W). The output torque
of the actuator matches the biological torque output exactly, due to the way
the simulations are calculated. Although the difference in peak power is small,
the difference in actuator velocity is very different in the no pretension and
pretensioned conditions. In the same time, the angle varies from −35 to 10° in the
no pretension state, while it only needs to travel from −25 to 2° in the pretensioned
state. This is seen in the bottom frame where the peak velocity is reduced from over
500°/s to below 100°/s at 7 mm pretension.

Fig. 5. Controller for Matlab modeling and ankle torque testing. The moment arm
position signal is fed through a PID controller to create a velocity setpoint for
the EPOS controller. The EPOS drives the motor at the specified velocity, which
compresses the main MACCEPA spring. The force on the spring is measured using
a load cell and the output torque is calculated. At the same time the ankle joint is
driven by another motor to track the Winter data.

of these three systems is the final knee torque, as in Eq. (5).
Tk (WALock , ETLock , θk ) = TWA (WALock , θk ) + TBL (θk )

+ TET (ETLock , θk )

(5)

where the total knee torque is dependent on the two (WA and ET)
lock states, as well as the angle of the knee. Once again the goal of
the system is to attempt to track the biological knee torque using
a combination of these three mechanisms.
By examining the torque–angle characteristic of the knee, it can
be shown that the knee normally dissipates energy, which provides
the opportunity to harvest this energy to be used in another part
of the prosthesis. Harvesting energy can be done by using springs
for energy storage which can later be delivered to the ankle for assistance. The Alpha-Prosthesis has been developed to test the pas-

8

L. Flynn et al. / Robotics and Autonomous Systems 73 (2015) 4–15

Fig. 6. Simulink model results of three different motors tracking the torque of the
ankle with a pretension of 7 mm, using the kinematic position of the ankle and the
desired moment arm position of the simulations from Fig. 4. The effect of a lower
bandwidth of the motor is shown by worse torque trajectory tracking. The three
motor/gearbox combinations are, with exception of the swing phase, within the
standard deviation of the Winter gait data [31], as shown shaded in light blue. (For
interpretation of the references to color in this figure legend, the reader is referred
to the web version of this article.)

sive spring system that allows this new energy storage and delivery
method.
Knee behavior can be subdivided into two parts, the weight acceptance phase, characterized by a high joint stiffness and high
torque, and the flexion phase, where there is a high knee flexion
of about 60° and a low torque to prevent the leg from extension
during swing phase. These knee behaviors can be roughly approximated by using two springs placed between the lower leg and the
upper leg. We have named these springs the WA spring, which
has a high stiffness, and BL spring, which has a low stiffness. The
torque–angle characteristics of these two springs and how they
compare to the target knee torque is shown in Fig. 7. A schematic
of the knee springs can be found in Fig. 8, showing the relative positions of the springs to the knee joint center. The realized knee
design can be found in Fig. 12.
2.2.1. Weight acceptance system
The WA spring must only be active during only a fraction of the
gait cycle directly following the heel strike (see Fig. 17 for details
about the timing). To insert and remove the effect of the spring on
the knee joint torque, a locking mechanism has been developed.
This lock allows the knee to perform either large knee flexion at
low torque when unlocked or small knee flexion at high torque
when locked. The locking of the knee needs to be light and low
power if harvesting energy from the knee is to be energetically interesting and the locking mechanism should allow the knee to lock
at any angle, effectively determining the rest position of the WA
spring. A ratchet and pawl system can satisfy both of these requirements, if implemented correctly [33]. Ideally at full extension the
spring and the WA linkage are in a near singular position, meaning the force applied by the spring is directed through the rotation
center of the linkage. The WA spring is then locked in place using the ratchet and pawl, and because of the kinematic position of
the linkage, a relatively low tension is required in the cable to hold
the spring in place. When the pawl is locked, the knee is free to
extend because the ratchet locks in only one direction. This allows
the locking mechanism to automatically follow the knee during extension, but immediately inhibits flexion of the knee. The spring
loaded ratchet and pawl mechanism is then unlocked so that the
WA linkage can rotate out of the way and the knee can quickly flex
to provide sufficient ground clearance for the swing phase.
The actual torque of the WA system is dependent on the state of
the locking mechanism, meaning locked or unlocked and the rest
position of the WA spring, as well as the angle of the knee and the

Fig. 7. Approximation of the knee torques using two springs. The WA phase
(between points 1 and 2 and 3) is mimicked by the WA spring, while pushoff
and swing phases (points 3–4–1) are handled by a combination of the BL spring
(shown as dotted line) and the ET system, which provides a positive (extension)
joint moment during early pushoff. (For interpretation of the references to color in
this figure legend, the reader is referred to the web version of this article.)

geometry of the WA spring at that specific lock state. Although this
is a non-linear function, during normal walking the behavior of the
spring is relatively linear in the torque–angle space, as illustrated
in Fig. 7.
2.2.2. Baseline spring system
The baseline spring (KBL ) is fixed in the system providing a flexion torque as a function of the knee angle. There is no locking mechanism of the baseline spring, nor is there a method of changing the
rest position of the spring. The flexion torque provided by the BL
spring ranges from approximately −20 N m at full extension to no
torque past 65° of knee flexion. Note that this spring resists knee
extension, which is contrary to most conventional knees, in order
to capture energy from the end of swing phase when the knee generally provides a braking torque to prevent knee overextension.
The torque of the BL spring is a non-linear function of the knee
angle, the behavior of which was chosen to track the target knee
torque by choosing the mounting points of the spring through simulation. The resultant torque is shown in Fig. 7.
2.2.3. Energy transfer
The WA and BL springs of the knee joint are not sufficient to
completely track the desired torque trajectory. Between the end
of the WA and the point of maximum flexion, a torque is needed
around the knee joint to prevent the knee joint from collapsing
during the pushoff phase (between points 3 and 4 in Fig. 7). At this
point, the ET locking mechanism directly connects the knee and the
ankle through a cable. This energy transfer mechanism provides
the necessary knee extension torque, producing negative work directly on the knee joint, and simultaneously transfers stored energy from the baseline spring to the ankle where it can be used
for pushoff. The torque provided by the ET system is a mixture of
both the knee and ankle behavior, determined around the knee by
the force and the effective moment arm of the ET cable. The energy
from the knee is then provided at the ankle, where the ankle torque
due to the ET is a product of the moment arm of the ankle and the
force in the cable.
Simulation of the ET phase consists of calculating the distance
between the knee and the ankle moment arms and modeling the
cable as a stiff spring to avoid overconstraining the system. Then
the knee torque can be calculated as the summation of the torques
of the BL spring and the ET mechanism, which must equal the
Winter target torque, solving this for the tension in the cable. Then
the tension of the cable and the ankle moment arm determines

L. Flynn et al. / Robotics and Autonomous Systems 73 (2015) 4–15

(a) Locked at full knee extension (straight leg).

9

(b) Unlocked knee bent.

Fig. 8. Schematic of the knee spring behavior. When locked the WA linkage and spring are in a near-singular position, allowing the tension in the WA cable to remain low.
The lock is only active in the flexion direction, in extension a spring loaded ratchet pulls up slack in the WA cable.

joint. A single toothed ratchet is centered on the joint axis and is
locked in place by the ET pawl. This locks the ratchet relative to the
top of the knee joint. The ratchet is also attached to a cable that is
connected to the rear of the foot. As the ratchet rotates, it pulls the
cable, plantarflexing the foot. Another feature of the design is that
once the knee flexes past a certain point, the cable automatically
unlocks because the attachment of the cable travels through the
knee joint center and the cable tension pulls the ratchet in the
opposite direction, effectively unlocking it. The angle at which
this happens can be set independently, as can the rest position of
the ankle. When unlocked, the ratchet is returned to the neutral
position by a small return spring but is free to move with respect to
the top of the knee and so as the knee flexes, the cable is not pulled.
Fig. 9. Motor power required to match the average ankle torque with (red line) and
without (black line) energy transfer from the knee. The negative work done by the
knee is brought to the ankle using a cable system. The additional torque provided by
the knee reduces the torque required at the ankle joint, reducing the overall power
requirement at the ankle. (For interpretation of the references to color in this figure
legend, the reader is referred to the web version of this article.)

the torque applied to the ankle, which is equal to the reduction
of torque of the ankle actuator.
During normal walking of an able-bodied person, a knee joint
primarily dissipates energy [31] providing an opportunity to harvest this energy for use during a different part of the gait cycle.
There are two times during the gait cycle which present the possibility to collect and deliver energy to the ankle. These times are at
the end of swing phase and during late pushoff, the combined energy of these two periods is displayed in the yellow shaded section
of Fig. 7.
At the end of swing phase, the ankle does not need power, and
therefore the energy harvested during this period of the gait cycle must be stored in the baseline spring at the front of the knee.
Then the coupling mechanism is locked during stance and pushoff,
providing a direct kinematic constraint between the knee and the
ankle. This kinematic constraint allows the torque generated by
the baseline spring and the ankle–knee kinematic constraint to effectively transfer energy to the ankle at the end of pushoff, creating the torque–angle relationship from points 3 back to 1 in
Fig. 7. Transferred energy is delivered with a slightly delayed ankle
pushoff when compared to normal gait in order to transfer maximum energy, meaning the ankle angle slightly trails what it would
if it were a normal gait cycle. Because this energy is now provided
at the moment where the ankle torque is the highest, there is a
large reduction in torque that the ankle actuator must provide.
In Fig. 9, the reduction in motor power due to the energy
transfer mechanism required to match the average ankle torque is
illustrated. The power peaks are lower and there is an overall drop
in energy usage of about 30% (7 J reduction compared to a total
consumption of 22 J per step) as well as a 25% drop in peak power.
Fig. 10 shows the knee mechanism as it is attached to the knee

3. Materials and methods
The completed prosthesis with motor drivers, shoe, insole, and
cosmetic cover weighed 5.2 kg, which is comparable to a normal
human leg, but considerably more than most commercial passive
prostheses. The system is comparable in weight to the state of the
art active prostheses, such as the Ossur Power Knee (3.19 kg, with
batteries) paired with the BiOM T2 (2.3 kg, with batteries). It should
be noted that the Alpha-Prosthesis has not been optimized for
weight, and in fact cannot largely deviate from the mass and inertia
of a normal human leg for the dynamics to work as simulated. It
is primarily a test bed for the new actuators and passive spring
principles of the knee.
3.1. Ankle
The new redesigned actuator solves many of the problems with
previous MACCEPA designs, such as removing cable systems and
using compact compression springs. The system also is capable of
providing 130 N m torque at the ankle, a requirement to provide
full normal joint torque and higher than previous designs by a
factor of two. The actuator also had firm size constraints requiring
us to fit inside a size 42(EU) shoe because of the insole sensors [34]
that were to be used with this prototype.
Fig. 11 shows all of the physical components of the ankle that
correspond to the schematic in Fig. 1. There is a plastic plate that
is used to provide toe flexion and a rubber cosmetic cover that fits
over the mechanism and allows it to fit snug within a shoe. The
cosmetic cover also provides a smooth surface to interface with the
insoles used for center of pressure measurements.
The main motor for the ankle actuator is a Maxon RE30 (60 W)
and utilizes a large 10:1 ratio hypoid gear as a final drive stage and
an initial gear stage of an 86:1 planetary gear system. This motor
was not the original motor chosen for the system, as was shown
in the ankle motor simulations, but was ultimately chosen due to
time constraints for the integration of the system in Italy. Although

10

L. Flynn et al. / Robotics and Autonomous Systems 73 (2015) 4–15

(a) Locked ET mechanism at full knee extension.

(b) Locked ET mechanism while knee is flexed,
kinematically linking the knee and ankle.

Fig. 10. Schematic of the knee energy transfer mechanism. As the locked mechanism flexes, the cable directly couples the kinematics of the knee and the ankle. When the
ET ratchet is unlocked, the knee and ankle move independently.

Fig. 11. Implementation of the MACCEPA actuator. Compare to Fig. 1.

the MACCEPA architecture lowers the peak power required by the
motor, the torque of the system remains the same, meaning the
gear drive system needs to be able to handle the full torque of the
output.
The pretension mechanism is housed under the MACCEPA
spring, comprised of a Maxon ECMax 16, 8 W motor with a 1621:1
ratio planetary gearbox connected to a custom 1.2:1 final stage.
This final drive contains an ACME nut with a 3 mm lead which
compresses the main spring against the slider. This system is represented as m in Fig. 1. The pretension motor is not powerful
enough to compress the spring under actuation or drive the load
fast enough to change precompression during the gait cycle. Instead it is used over many gait cycles to tune the gait as necessary,
particularly to change the required velocity characteristics of the
moment arm.
3.2. Knee
Fig. 12 shows the rear of the physical realization of the schematics in Figs. 8 and 10. Here we can see both of the ratchet mechanisms on the inner sides of the knee structure, as well as the two
springs.

Fig. 12. Rear view of knee displaying the locking mechanisms and springs. The
baseline spring (blue) is on the front of the knee and is seen to the left of the weight
acceptance spring (red). (For interpretation of the references to color in this figure
legend, the reader is referred to the web version of this article.)

3.3. Sensors and control system
The control system runs on a real-time controller, a cRIO
9082 (National Instruments, Austin, Texas, US), endowed with a
1.33 GHz dual-core processor running an NI real-time operating
system and a Field Programmable Gate Array (FPGA) processor
Spartan-6 LX150. This system is not only responsible for the prosthesis, but also for the CYBERLEGs exoskeleton and sensing arrays. The main ankle motor is controlled by means of a commercial
servo driver EPOS2 70/10 (Maxon Motor AG, Sachseln, Switzerland), while the pretension system is driven by a Maxon EPOS2
24/2. A closed-loop PID controller is used to control the MACCEPA
moment arm position, a schematic of the control system can be
found in Fig. 5. Control of the reference signal for the MACCEPA
as well as for the locking–unlocking mechanisms is based on the
estimates of the vertical ground reaction force and coordinates
of the center of pressure gathered by means of two 64-channel
pressure-sensitive insoles embedded into the sport shoes worn by
the amputee [34] (see Section 4.2 for details about how this was
used in the trials). This initial finite state machine control system

L. Flynn et al. / Robotics and Autonomous Systems 73 (2015) 4–15

11

4.2. Walking tests

Fig. 13. Desired and actual output torques of the ankle actuator. The target is set
to 70% of the total joint torque at 2 s/stride. This test was using the Maxon EC-4pole
30 with an 86:1 gearbox.

is intended to only provide basic capabilities for testing and validation purposes and will be later replaced by a novel hybrid control
system based on motor primitives and feedback reflexes [35,36].
4. Experiments
First a characterization of the ankle actuator was performed to
investigate the new MACCEPA behavior under a cyclical torque as
seen during walking. Then the prosthesis was worn by a number
of amputee subjects to tune the initial state machine and evaluate
the behavior of the device in actual use.
4.1. Ankle bench tests
The ankle actuator was fixed to a test apparatus and a torsional
load cell was attached coincident with the ankle axis. The load cell
was then fixed to the apparatus, locking the ankle joint angle. A
commanded torque signal at 70% of the amplitude and at 2 s/stride
was created from the Winter torque data, based on expected
performance of the subjects. The desired torque signal was sent
to the controller, as seen in Fig. 5, and the output torque of the
actuator was measured by the external load cell at 1 kHz.
The force on the external torque transducer was compared with
the calculated torque from the MACCEPA load cell mounted in
the actuator and it was found that the readings matched within a
few percent, lending confidence to the calculated values from the
internal load cell measurements.
The actuator was able to track the torque command reasonably
well, staying within the standard deviation of the measured torque
data from Winter during most of the stride. There is some tracking
error particularly after the pushoff phase as the moment arm must
swing from fully plantarflexed to the dorsiflexion side of the foot,
as can be seen in Fig. 13.

a

b

c

d

e

Initial trials to fine tune the mechanics of the prosthesis were
performed using a bent knee cast on healthy individuals at Scuola
Superiore Sant’Anna, Pontedera, Italy. Later the device was transferred to be tested on three amputee subjects at the Fondazione
Don Carlo Gnocchi in Florence, Italy. These subjects walked along
a 10 m long catwalk, as preferred by the patients. Fig. 14 shows
a typical stride of a subject down the catwalk. The prosthesis was
tethered to the control system which was housed on a cart traveling beside the patient.
Preliminary testing with both intact and amputated limbs has
proven successful, with one significant caveat. During these early
trials the moment arm position was commanded to half of the full
range of torque required by the ankle during normal gait because
of problems with bandwidth limitations of the actuator. The low
bandwidth was due to changing the motor to a much smaller 60 W
Maxon RE30 motor at the test site due to limitations with the initial
motor drivers sourced for the project. The motor/gearbox combination used in these tests were much slower than the initial design suggested, in fact they are approximately four times slower
than the bench tested drives, but used so that integration into the
larger CYBERLEGs system could be expedited. The pretension of the
system was chosen by pre-selecting a value based on the behavior
during test walks, in most cases around 7 mm (900 N) of pretension
was used.
Because the actuator was slow, it could not reach the full range
necessary to meet the mean trajectory from the Winter Data in
the timeframe of one step, and required careful timing of the state
machine to achieve suitable ground clearance. This can be seen in
Fig. 15, as the toe extension has been omitted at the end of pushoff
in order to move the toe in position for the swing phase. Bandwidth
tests showed the cutoff frequency of the actuator at 60 N m to be
around 0.43 Hz, and although in simulation this reaches within the
standard deviation of the normal gait cycle, it causes noticeable
problems such as low toe clearance due to the slow dorsiflexion of
the ankle after pushoff. Also the excessive dorsiflexion at the beginning of the step is a result of the slow moment arm movement,
which can also be seen in the simulation (Fig. 6). The highly limited
moment arm velocity was by far the limiting factor in performance
of the prosthesis, but even with low torque and resulting deviation
of the kinematics, we were able to achieve adequate ground clearance in the swing phase during the trials and show a positive injection of energy at the ankle joint. With a small change to the motor
of the system, as in the simulations the velocity profile should be
greatly improved and we expect velocity related problems, such as
toe clearance during swing, to be greatly reduced.
Initial datasets were created using a finite state machine using
the center of pressure location of the insole sensors to trigger gait
state transitions. A sample dataset from an amputee subject can
be found in Fig. 16. Here we can see the gait state determined by

f

g

h

i

Fig. 14. Gait phases of an amputee walking. From left to right: (a) Heel strike of the prosthesis. (b) Toe off of the sound limb. (c) Early swing of the sound limb. (d) Mid stance
of prosthetic limb and late swing of the sound limb. (e) Heel off of prosthetic limb and heel strike of the sound limb. (f) End of double support and toe off of the prosthetic
limb. (g) Early swing of the prosthetic limb. (h) Late swing of prosthetic limb and mid stance of the sound limb. (i) Heel strike of prosthetic limb.

12

L. Flynn et al. / Robotics and Autonomous Systems 73 (2015) 4–15

Fig. 15. Ankle torque–angle characteristics during first walking trials. The area of
the loop is in the clockwise direction, with a negative torque, indicating energy
injection into the system.

the insoles, which in turn drive the desired MACCEPA moment arm
position. The gait is broken into 4 sections, the Swing Phase (SW),
Early Stance (ES), Mid Stance (MS), and Late Stance (LS). Swing
Phase is determined by the single support phase of the sound leg,
Early Stance is defined as the double support phase after heel strike
of the prosthesis, Mid Stance is the single support phase of the
prosthesis, and Late Stance is the double support phase after the
sound leg heel strike. Other methods were used during the trials to
determine the state changes, such as center of pressure thresholds.
This technique changed the gait state when the center of pressure
of the stance foot passed a certain point on the sole. As the state
machine was only used for validation purposes, the exact method
of state triggering was not rigorously evaluated. Each of the states
held a preset moment arm trajectory (of MA in red in Fig. 16), determined by a linear fit to the trajectories found in simulation. These
were then modified empirically to achieve suitable ground clearance and pushoff behavior. We also saw good knee flexion during
swing and a prolonged stance flex stage, ended by knee extension
at the beginning of pushoff.
The baseline spring was also adjusted with a lower spring constant of 5000 N/mto better match the gait speed of the patient. The
preferred walking speed of the amputees was considerably slower
(≈1.5 s/stride compared to 1 s/stride) than the target kinematics,
and therefore there was less energy in the swing phase to store in
the baseline spring.
4.3. Walking with energy transfer
During these tests, the energy transfer mechanism was installed
and the state machine was updated. Whereas before the weight acceptance spring remained locked during the whole single support
phase of the amputated leg to make up for the lack of extension
torque when the energy transfer system was not being utilized,
with the energy transfer mechanism in the system the knee stiffness during this phase is guaranteed. This can be seen in the locking diagram in Fig. 17. The WA mechanism was unlocked based on
the center of pressure measurement in the insole. When the center of pressure passed a certain threshold, the state machine ended
the weight acceptance and locked the energy transfer mechanism.
The tests were performed by a transfemoral amputee on the same
10 m long catwalk as used for the previous walking tests. The amputee walked about 4 steps with the prosthesis, during every run
and each run he switched the leg with which he initiated the gait.

Fig. 16. Preliminary dataset from the first prosthesis trials. Use of an early finite
state machine with a conservative moment arm position with low torque. The state
values are described as the Swing Phase (SW), Early Stance (ES), Mid Stance (MS),
and Late Stance (LS). The red moment arm position is the approximation for the
desired moment arm position used in the initial state machine trials with the energy
transfer system in place. (For interpretation of the references to color in this figure
legend, the reader is referred to the web version of this article.)

The energy transfer cable was connected between the ankle and
the knee lever arms and tensioned by rotating the lever arms into
their calculated optimal initial positions. For the knee lever arm,
the locking position corresponds to an angle of 110° between the
upper leg and the lever arm. For the ankle the position of the moment arm is at 120° with respect to the shank. After an initial run
the measured data were analyzed and the lever arm positions and
cable length were adjusted. This was done again after every five
test runs for a total of 20 test runs.
Fig. 18 shows the timing of the energy transfer cable force with
the ankle torque. As the knee joint bends, the locked cable creates
a torque around the ankle, reducing the moment required by the
actuator motor at exactly the time when peak torque is required
by the actuator. In this figure, the force in the cable corresponds
to an ankle torque of approximately 3.6 N m, which is negligible
for energy consumption measurements. The expected force in the
cable should be around 650 N when tuned correctly, resulting in
a 20 N m reduction in the torque required by the ankle actuator.
Reducing the maximum torque the ankle motor has to apply during
pushoff can reduce the energy consumption of the prosthesis from
1 J up to 12 J per step if the timing is correct between the knee and
the ankle. This could potentially mean a reduction between 6% and
65% in the power required from the motor output. The tuning of
this mechanism is extremely critical, and due to the low number of
steps during a walking trial, it was difficult to reach a steady state
and consistent gait for good power measurements of this system.
For better measurements, it would be beneficial to have treadmill
trials, but none of the patients felt comfortable enough to use the
prosthesis on the treadmill with so little training time.
5. Discussion
5.1. Ankle and knee
The ankle actuator has performed well throughout the trials,
providing energy input to the ankle as planned. It was not

L. Flynn et al. / Robotics and Autonomous Systems 73 (2015) 4–15

13

100
80
60
40
20
0
0

10

20

30

40

50

60

70

80

90

100

Fig. 17. Locking diagram for the knee locks, including the energy transfer system. Shows the timing of the locking of the weight acceptance spring and the energy transfer
system, with respect to the desired knee angle and the Heel Strike (HS), Foot Flat (FF), Heel Off (HO), and Toe Off (TO) times of the prosthesis.

180
160
140
120
100
80
60
40
20
0
–20

0

0.5

1

1.5

2

2.5

3

3.5

Fig. 18. The timing of the energy transfer cable force at the peak of pushoff. Although the timing of the force in the ET cable is correct, the absolute torque produced during the trial is low due to tuning of the system. During this trial, the torque
amounts to approximately 3.6 N m, which is negligible for energy consumption
measurements. The expected force in the cable should be around 650 N when tuned
correctly.

expected that the current motor/gearbox combination could track
the average Winter ankle kinematics exactly, but it has shown clear
injection of energy into the gait cycle.
Changing the pretension of the MACCEPA during the gait cycle
has not been properly investigated because the prototype does not
allow for this capability. However, it is possible that if we were able
to vary the stiffness properties of the spring using the pretension
mechanism during the gait cycle, the total energy consumption
of the system may be reduced. There is also the potential for
the pretension motor to work against the main motor, causing a
dramatic increase in energy consumption. Although it would be
possible to optimize the tuning for both motors using the results
from the simulations, it is hard to predict the exact behavior of the
prosthesis when being worn by an amputee. In addition, Winter’s
biological data are given as averages from a number of subjects, and
inter-subject variation must be accounted by individual tuning.
Given the complexity of the rest of the system, it is better to only
actuate the pretension mechanism between trials, to change the
overall behavior of the actuator for these initial trials.
5.2. Transferred energy
As discussed before, according to the preferences of the test
subjects, a lighter baseline spring and lower walking speed were
used in the trials than what was calculated in the simulations. As a
consequence, less energy can be stored during the end of the swing
phase, and less energy can be transferred to the ankle joint. In simulations a stiff spring was considered in the energy transfer mechanism as both the knee and the ankle joint angles have been used
as inputs. For the experiments the elasticity of the mechanism and
cable were expected to be high enough to approximate this high
stiffness. The downside of this high stiffness is that the positioning

of the moment arms has to be very precise, as small variations in
the length of the cable have a big impact on the energy transfer.
Tuning the mechanism for an optimized energy transfer is
something that could not be done easily with the current design.
The next design, currently in development, will allow changing the
cable length by means of a motor and separate from the moment
arm angles, which will greatly increase the tunability. Other factors that could increase the transferred energy are longer runways
or executing experiments on a treadmill, which would allow the
amputee to reach a steady state allowing for consistent measurements. The active prosthesis is a device that differs from the passive
devices the test subjects are used to, so more training is necessary
to obtain good results.
5.3. Achievements
The prosthesis has proven that using an active ankle with a primarily passive knee and knee to ankle energy transfer system can
work. The ankle has shown a good power injection during the gait
cycle. The knee has shown a good knee flexion during swing allowing suitable toe clearance, while providing the required stiffness
during stance phase. The energy transfer system shows that a knee
to ankle transfer system can work, with the timing of the force between the knee and the ankle correctly applied during the pushoff
phase.
6. Conclusions
The CYBERLEGs Alpha-Prosthesis was designed to test the behaviors of three systems: a new compliant ankle actuator, a new
passive knee utilizing springs to store braking energy from the
knee, and an energy transfer mechanism to deliver the stored energy of the knee to the ankle. These devices have been successfully
used by amputees in a limited three subject trial. This design philosophy is very different from current passive prostheses, which
generally utilize dampers in the knee to dissipate the braking energy and keep knee and ankle prostheses separate from one another. The results are promising, showing that there is an injection
of energy at the ankle, assisting the pushoff, the passive knee is
capable of producing reasonable knee kinematics with a nice natural swing phase, and the energy transfer mechanism is capable of
producing a torque on the ankle form the knee at the correct time
during the gait cycle.
The current control system incorporates the use of pressuresensitive foot insoles to determine the state of the gait cycle on-line
and control the knee and ankle modules, as well as their mechanical coupling. Recorded data and feedback from both healthy and
amputated subjects have proven successful performance and encourage a more extensive experimental characterization, including
the effect of actuator pretension, on the energetics of the gait cycle
and the effects of the energy transfer mechanism. The device has
proved to be a valuable testbed for multiple control schemes translating the user motion intentions into motor commands to incorporate the prosthesis within the larger CYBERLEGs framework.

14

L. Flynn et al. / Robotics and Autonomous Systems 73 (2015) 4–15

By inspection,
Cy = B sin α

(11)

and therefore β can be defined in terms of α as
tan(β) =

Cy

−Cx2

.

(12)

Combining Eqs. (7) and (12), we see that
Fig. 19. The actuator configuration in the constrained static condition. The force
balance on the sliding point b is shown to the right.

Future work includes expanding upon the passive mechanism
of this design with actuation, and a prosthesis is currently in development. This will allow sit to stand and stair climbing operations in
addition to efficient walking. This new system will also allow easier tuning and individualization of the ET mechanism and a more
reliable WA system.
Acknowledgments

Fk ∗ Cy

(13)

Cx2

and by substitution,
Fk ∗ B sin α

f (α, P ) =



A 1−

B
A

sin α

2 1/2 .

Appendix

(14)

The spring force is defined as the spring constant k times the
displacement of the spring, which can be determined from Fig. 1 as
Fk = k(P + A + B − C (α)).

This work was funded by the European Commission 7th Framework Program as part of the CYBERLEGs project, Grant No. 287894.
The second author was funded by a Ph.D. grant of the Agency for
Innovation by Science and Technology in Flanders (IWT). The authors would also like to thank Marnix De Boom and Marc Luypaert
for their work building the Alpha-Prosthesis.

(15)

A final substitution shows that
f (α, P ) =

kB(P + A + B − C (α)) sin α



A 1−

B
A

sin α

2 1/2

(16)

as defined in Eq. (3).
References

To clarify the derivations of Eqs. (2) and (3), we add the
following appendix.
The actuator analysis is conducted under static conditions, with
the configuration found in Fig. 19.
The actuator has 3 links, where link C is aligned with the x-axis.
C also varies in length as the slider containing point b moves along
the x-axis. The actuator is constrained by a pin joint at point a and a
rolling contact at point b, which constrain the slider in the positive
and negative vertical directions.
By examining the force balance at point b, we can see that the
force due to the compressed MACCEPA spring is defined as Fk , and
the force due to the actuator linkage on point b is F . The direction
of this force is at an angle β with respect to the horizontal and
varies with the MACCEPA moment arm angle α . The components
of F along the x and y axes are called Fx and Fy , respectively. Fg is
the vertical constraint force due to the contact of the slider. Fy is
the vertical component of the actuator force, and is the same force
from Eq. (3), f (α, P ).
By the force balance for the static system, it can be shown that
Fk = −Fx

(6)

and so
tan(β) =

Fy =

Fy

−Fk

.

(7)

Using the law of cosines to solve for C (α) yields


C (α) = B cos α + A 1 −



B
A

sin α

2 1/2
(8)

the same result found in Eq. (2). This segment can be broken into
two components, Cx1 and Cx2 shown in Fig. 19, as
Cx1 = B cos α


Cx2 = A 1 −

(9)



B
A

sin α

2 1/2

.

(10)

[1] T.R. Dillingham, L.E. Pezzin, E.J. MacKenzie, Limb amputation and limb
deficiency: epidemiology and recent trends in the United States, South. Med.
J. 95 (8) (2002) 875–883.
[2] K. Ziegler-Graham, E.J. MacKenzie, P.L. Ephraim, T.G. Travison, R. Brookmeyer,
Estimating the prevalence of limb loss in the United States: 2005 to 2050, Arch.
Phys. Med. Rehabil. 89 (3) (2008) 422–429. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.apmr.
2007.11.005. URL: http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/18295618.
[3] R.L. Waters, J. Perry, D. Antonelli, H. Hislop, Energy cost of walking of
amputees: the influence of level of amputation, J. Bone Joint Surg. [Am.] 58
(1976) 42–46.
[4] K.R. Kaufman, J.A. Levine, R.H. Brey, S.K. Mccrady, D.J. Padgett, M.J. Joyner,
Energy expenditure and activity of transfemoral amputees using mechanical
and microprocessor-controlled prosthetic knees, Arch. Phys. Med. Rehabil. 89
(2008) 1380–1385. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.apmr.2007.11.053.
[5] J.J. Genin, G.J. Bastien, B. Franck, C. Detrembleur, P.A. Williems, Effect of speed
on the energy cost of walking in unilateral traumatic lower limb amputees,
Eur. J. Appl. Physiol. 103 (2008) 655–663. http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/s00421008-0764-0.
[6] A.B. Sawers, B.J. Hafner, Outcomes associated with the use of microprocessorcontrolled prosthetic knees among individuals with unilateral transfemoral
limb loss: a systematic review, J. Rehabil. Res. Dev. 50 (3) (2013) 273–314.
URL: http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/23881757.
[7] J.K. Hitt, R. Bellman, M. Holgate, T.G. Sugar, K.W. Hollander, The SPARKy (Spring
Ankle with Regenerative Kinetics) project: design and analysis of a robotic
transtibial prosthesis with regenerative kinetics, in: ASME International
Design Engineering Technical Conferences & Computers and Information
in Engineering Conference IDETC/CIE 2007, Las Vegas, Nevada, USA, 2007,
pp. 1587–1596.
[8] S. Au, M. Berniker, H. Herr, Powered ankle-foot prosthesis to assist levelground and stair-descent gaits, Neural Netw. 21 (4) (2008) 654–666. http:
//dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.neunet.2008.03.006. URL: http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.
gov/pubmed/18499394.
[9] Ossur, 2013. www.ossur.com.
[10] P. Cherelle, V. Grosu, A. Matthys, B. Vanderborght, D. Lefeber, Design and
validation of the ankle mimicking prosthetic (AMP-) Foot 2.0, IEEE Trans.
Neural Syst. Rehabil. Eng. PP (99) (2013) 1. http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/TNSRE.
2013.2282416.
[11] R.D. Bellman, M.A. Holgate, T.G. Sugar, SPARKy 3: design of an active robotic
ankle prosthesis with two actuated degrees of freedom using regenerative
kinetics, in: IEEE RAS & EMBS International Conference on Biomedical Robotics
and Biomechatronics, 2008, pp. 511–516. http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/BIOROB.
2008.4762887. URL: http://ieeexplore.ieee.org/lpdocs/epic03/wrapper.htm?
arnumber=4762887.
[12] J. Zhu, Q. Wang, L. Wang, On the design of a powered transtibial prosthesis
with stiffness adaptable ankle and toe joints, IEEE Trans. Ind. Electron. PP (99)
(2013) 1. http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/TIE.2013.2293691.

L. Flynn et al. / Robotics and Autonomous Systems 73 (2015) 4–15
[13] A.H. Shultz, J.E. Mitchell, D. Truex, B.E. Lawson, M. Goldfarb, Preliminary
evaluation of a walking controller for a powered ankle prosthesis, in: IEEE
International Conference on Robotics and Automation, 2013, pp. 4823–4828.
[14] E.C.M. Villalpando, J. Weber, G. Elliott, H. Herr, A. State, Design of an
agonist–antagonist active knee prosthesis, in: IEEE/RAS-EMBS International
Conference on Biomedical Robotics and Biomechatronics, 2008, pp. 529–534.
[15] F. Sup, H.A. Varol, J. Mitchell, T.J. Withrow, M. Goldfarb, Preliminary
evaluations of a self-contained anthropomorphic transfemoral prosthesis,
IEEE/ASME Trans. Mechatronics 14 (6) (2009) 667–676. http://dx.doi.org/
10.1109/TMECH.2009.2032688. URL: http://www.pubmedcentral.nih.gov/
articlerender.fcgi?artid=2801882&tool=pmcentrez&rendertype=abstract.
[16] K.W. Hollander, R. Ilg, T.G. Sugar, D. Herring, An efficient robotic tendon for
gait assistance, J. Biomech. Eng. 128 (5) (2006) 788–791. http://dx.doi.org/10.
1115/1.2264391. URL: http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/16995768.
[17] S. Au, H. Herr, Powered ankle-foot prosthesis, IEEE Robot. Autom. Mag.
15 (3) (2008) 52–59. http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/MRA.2008.927697. URL:
http://ieeexplore.ieee.org/lpdocs/epic03/wrapper.htm?arnumber=4624583.
[18] B. Vanderborght, A. Albu-Schaeffer, A. Bicchi, E. Burdet, D. Caldwell, R.
Carloni, M. Catalano, O. Eiberger, W. Friedl, G. Ganesh, M. Garabini, M.
Grebenstein, G. Grioli, S. Haddadin, H. Hoppner, A. Jafari, M. Laffranchi, D.
Lefeber, F. Petit, S. Stramigioli, N. Tsagarakis, M.V. Damme, R.V. Ham, L.
Visser, S. Wolf, Variable impedance actuators: a review, Robot. Auton. Syst. 61
(12) (2013) 1601–1614. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.robot.2013.06.009. URL:
http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0921889013001188.
[19] SpringActive, ODYSSEY. http://www.springactive.com/.
[20] IWalk, BiOM. http://www.iwalk.com/.
[21] H.M. Herr, A.M. Grabowski, Bionic ankle-foot prosthesis normalizes walking
gait for persons with leg amputation, Proc. R. Soc. Lond. B 279 (2012) 457–464.
[22] E.J. Rouse, L.M. Mooney, E.C. Martinez-Villalpando, H.M. Herr, Clutchable
series-elastic actuator: design of a robotic knee prosthesis for minimum
energy consumption, in: IEEE International Conference on Rehabilitation
Robotics 2013 (1122374), 2013, pp. 1–6. http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/ICORR.
2013.6650383. URL: http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/24187202.
[23] A.O. Kapti, M.S. Yucenur, Design and control of an active artificial knee joint,
Mech. Mach. Theory 41 (12) (2006) 1477–1485. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.
mechmachtheory.2006.01.017. URL: http://linkinghub.elsevier.com/retrieve/
pii/S0094114X06000243.
[24] Y. Geng, X. Xu, L. Chen, P. Yang, Design and analysis of active transfemoral
prosthesis, in: IECON Conference on IEEE Industrial Electronics Society, 2010,
pp. 1495–1499. http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/IECON.2010.5675461. URL: http://
ieeexplore.ieee.org/lpdocs/epic03/wrapper.htm?arnumber=5675461.
[25] A. Staros, E.F. Murphy, Properties of fluid flow applied to above-knee
prostheses, Bull. Prosthet. Res. Spring (1964) 40–65.
[26] A. Matthys, P. Cherelle, M. Van Damme, B. Vanderborght, D. Lefeber,
Concept and design of the HEKTA (Harvest Energy from the Knee and
Transfer it to the Ankle) transfemoral prosthesis, in: IEEE International
Conference on Biomedical Robotics and Biomechatronics, 2012, pp. 550–555.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/BioRob.2012.6290833.
[27] R. Unal, S.M. Behrens, R. Carloni, E.E.G. Hekman, S. Stramigioli, H.F.J.M.
Koopman, Prototype design and realization of an innovative energy efficient
transfemoral prosthesis, in: Proceedings of the 2010 3rd IEE RAS & EMBS
International Conference on Biomedical Robotics and Biomechatronics, 2010,
pp. 191–196.
[28] R. Van Ham, B. Vanderborght, M. van Damme, B. Verrelst, D. Lefeber, MACCEPA,
the mechanically adjustable compliance and controllable equilibrium position
actuator: design and implementation in a biped robot, Robot. Auton. Syst. 55
(10) (2007) 761–768.
[29] J. Pratt, B. Krupp, C. Morse, Series elastic actuators for high fidelity force
control, 2002. http://dx.doi.org/10.1108/01439910210425522.
[30] OttoBock, 2013. www.ottobock.com.
[31] D.A. Winter, Biomechanics and Motor Control of Human Movement, John
Wiley and Sons, United States of America, 2005.
[32] P. Beyl, M. Van Damme, R. Van Ham, B. Vanderborght, D. Lefeber, Design
and control of a lower limb exoskeleton for robot-assisted gait training,
Appl. Bionics Biomech. 6 (2) (2009) 229–243. http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/
11762320902784393.
[33] J. Geeroms, L. Flynn, R. Jimenez-Fabian, B. Vanderborght, D. Lefeber, Design,
development and testing of a lightweight and compact locking mechanism
for a passive knee prosthesis, in: IEEE International Conference on Biomedical
Robotics and Biomechatronics, 2014.
[34] M. Donati, et al., A flexible sensor technology for the distributed measurement
of interaction pressure, Sensors 13 (1) (2013) 1021–1045.
[35] R. Ronsse, N. Vitiello, T. Lenzi, J. van den Kieboom, M. Carrozza, A. Ijspeert,
Human–robot synchrony: flexible assistance using adaptive oscillators, IEEE
Trans. Biomed. Eng. 58 (4) (2011) 1001–1012. http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/
TBME.2010.2089629.
[36] R. Ronsse, T. Lenzi, N. Vitiello, B. Koopman, E. Asseldonk, S. Rossi, J.
Kieboom, H. Kooij, M. Carrozza, A. Ijspeert, Oscillator-based assistance of
cyclical movements: model-based and model-free approaches, Med. Biol. Eng.
Comput. 49 (10) (2011) 1173–1185. http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/s11517-0110816-1. URL: http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/s11517-011-0816-1.

15

Louis Flynn received his M.S. in Mechanical Engineering
from Michigan State University in 2009. He is currently a
Ph.D. student at the Vrije Universiteit Brussel developing
actuated prostheses and exoskeletons.

Joost Geeroms obtained his Master’s degree from the Vrije
Universiteit Brussel in 2011. He is currently a Ph.D. student
and funded by a Ph.D. grant of the Agency for Innovation
by Science and Technology Flanders (IWT). His research is
centered on actuated prosthetics.

Rene Jimenez-Fabian received his Doctoral degree in Engineering from Universidad Nacional Autnoma de Mexico
in 2006. His work focuses on the application of control and
parameter identification techniques to the development of
electromechanical systems. He is currently working on the
CYBERLEGs project addressing some issues related to the
mechanical design, instrumentation, and control of an active lower-limb prosthesis.

Bram Vanderborght received his Ph.D. in 2007. The focus
of his research was the use of adaptable compliance of
pneumatic artificial muscles in the dynamically balanced
biped Lucy. In 2006 he performed research on the
humanoids robot HRP-2 in AIST, Tsukuba (Japan). From
October 2007 to April 2010 he worked as a postdoctoral researcher at IIT (Italy). Since October 2009, he
is appointed as a Professor at the VUB. He is a member
of the Young Academy of the Royal Flemish Academy of
Belgium for Science and Arts. In 2013 he received an ERC
Starting Grant. His research interests include cognitive and
physical human robot interaction with core technology using variable impedance
actuators.

Nicola Vitiello received the M.Sc. degree in Biomedical
Engineering (cum laude) from the University of Pisa, Italy,
in 2006, and from Scuola Superiore Sant’Anna, Pisa, Italy,
in 2007. He also received the Ph.D. degree in Biorobotics
from the Scuola Superiore Sant’Anna, Pisa, Italy, in 2010.
He is currently an Assistant Professor with The BioRobotics
Institute, Scuola Superiore Sant’Anna, where he leads the
Wearable Robotics Laboratory. He is the author or coauthor of 35 ISI/Scopus papers and 30 peer-reviewed
conference proceedings papers. He has served as the
Scientific Secretary of the EU FP7 CA-RoboCom project,
and he is currently the Project Coordinator of: the EU FP7 CYBERLEGs Project, the
IUVO Project funded by Fondazione Pisa, and the EARLYREHAB Project funded by
Regione Toscana.

Dirk Lefeber received the degree in Study of Civil Engineering at the Vrije Universiteit Brussel and a Ph.D. in
Applied Sciences, Vrije Universiteit Brussel, in 1986. Currently he is a Professor at the Department of Mechanical
Engineering and Head of the Robotics and Multibody Mechanics Research Group, Vrije Universiteit Brussel. His research interests are new actuators with adaptable compliance, dynamically balanced robots, robot assistants, rehabilitation robotics and multibody dynamics.

