Robotics and Autonomous Systems 73 (2015) 1–3

Contents lists available at ScienceDirect

Robotics and Autonomous Systems
journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/robot

Editorial

Wearable robotics for motion assistance and rehabilitation

1. Introduction
The population aged 60 and over is expected to rise considerably in the coming years. The rise in life expectancy combined with
falling birth rates will accelerate the aging of this population. Facing this problem or reducing its effect would have a great societal
impact by improving the quality of life and regaining people’s independence to make them active in society, and life being active,
fulfilling and living independently. On the other hand, robotic applications have rapidly expanded from classical industrial applications with repetitive tasks to applications with close human–robot
interaction. Particularly, assistive robotics has gained an increasing
attention in the last decades. Indeed, adaptation of healthcare services to the needs of this dependent population will have a great
impact on the development of assisting robotic devices. In addition, technological advances and the emergence of novel adapted
technologies such as wearable and ubiquitous technologies with
considerable reduction in size, cost and energy consumption are
becoming a privileged solution to provide assistive services to humans. This challenging technology is expected to work closely, interact and collaborate with people in an intelligent environment.
While initially conceived for human movement augmentation
purposes, wearable powered robots have been gradually proposed
as a technological aid for rehabilitation and assistance, and functional substitution in patients suffering from motor disorders. In
order to develop effective, portable and safe robotic wearable
robots, different main aspects need to be taken into account such
as mechanism, actuation mode, control strategy, physical (p-) and
cognitive human–machine interface (c-HRI), as well as methods to
assess performance.1 The design and choice of the actuation mode
play a crucial role in the development of wearable robotic devices,
as they generally determine the performances of these robots, such
as output force/torque and mechanical impedance, efficiency and
portability.
Human–robot interaction is another key issue in the design
of wearable robots. This is true both for the design of the p-HRI,
which must allow for a comfortable exchange of mechanical power
between the human and robot, and the c-HRI, which shall endow
the robot with the capability to reliably and easily decode the
user intended movement, and smoothly translate it into motor
commands for the robot.

1 J.L. Pons, Rehabilitation exoskeletal robotics, IEEE Eng. Med. Biol. Mag. 29 (3)
(2010) 57–63.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.robot.2015.03.005
0921-8890/
© 2015 Published by Elsevier B.V.

Over these years, despite of the significant technological and
scientific advancements achieved in the field of wearable powered
robotic technologies, we have not yet witnessed the success of a
fully-wearable powered assistive robotic device, e.g. a robotic suit,
which is easy to wear and intuitive to cooperate with.
2. RoboAssist 2013 — Workshop
This Special Issue on Wearable Robotics for Motion Assistance
and Rehabilitation results from RoboAssist 2013 symposium that
was organized in conjunction with the International Congress on
Neurotechnology, Electronics and Informatics — NEUROTECHNIX
2013 that was held in Vilamoura (Portugal) on 20th of September,
2013. The purpose of this symposium was to gather researchers
from different backgrounds to discuss, learn about the highly interdisciplinary field of wearable robots and promote solutions that
provide energy harvesting, complete wearability, portability and
reliability of the device, as well as user’s safety. The accepted papers provided deep discussions about the state of the art, challenges and limiting factors for developing sustainable wearable
robots for assistive and rehabilitation of human movements. The
proposed symposium included contributions that highlighted particularly issues related to novel kinematics and actuation solutions
for wearable robots, growing challenges of using novel human–
robot multimodal interaction paradigms and issues related to cognitive/physical human–robot interactions.
3. Summary of the special issue
Given the acceptance and success of the RoboAssist 2013
symposium, we promoted this Special Issue, which was open to all,
and not only to the RoboAssist 2013 contributors. This special issue
collected the best papers selected among the papers presented at
the symposium and also papers coming from other contributors.
A brief introduction of each of the accepted papers in the special
issue is shown in the following:
In paper Wang et al., a proprioceptive neuromuscular facilitation (PNF) integrated robotic ankle-foot system for post stroke rehabilitation is proposed. The system consists of a robotic platform
and a control system with a graphical user interface. The reliability and feasibility of the proposed system were validated with
five healthy subjects. To validate the effectiveness of the PNF integrated robotic system, five stroke patients were recruited and
carried out a six-week PNF treatment. Treatment outcome was

2

Editorial / Robotics and Autonomous Systems 73 (2015) 1–3

evaluated quantitatively in passive and active joint properties.
The passive hysteresis loop shows that the maximum dorsiflexion angle increases while the resistance torque decreases. The active joint properties were improved significantly with the training
score increasing, and getting closer to that of healthy subjects.
The results demonstrated that the proposed PNF integrated robotic
anklefoot rehabilitation system is effective in improving ankle
spasticity and/or contracture and is a promising solution in clinical rehabilitation.
In paper Villoslada et al., a flexible Shape Memory Alloy (SMA)
actuator designed to increase the limited displacement that these
alloys can induce is presented. The SMA actuator has been designed
so that it can be bent up to about 180 degrees, providing more
freedom of movements and a better integration in wearable robots,
specially in soft wearable robots, than standard rigid solutions.
Although the actuator length is relatively short, this original design
allows a great linear displacement, because it can have one or
more loops of the same SMA wire inside the actuator. This implies
that the length of the SMA wire is at least two times greater than
the length of the actuator. The adopted strategy for both position
and speed control that overcomes the hysteresis and prevents
overheating the actuator is also described. The control algorithm
has been implemented in a rapid control prototyping (RCP) system
based on a low-cost hardware platform. Finally, the application of
this novel actuator in a wrist exoskeleton prototype is shown to
demonstrate the feasibility of using the flexible SMA actuator in a
real soft wearable robot.
In paper Huang et al., an omni-directional walking-aid robot
is developed to assist the elderly in the daily-living movements.
A motion control strategy of walking-aid robot based on the
observation of the human status through wearable sensors is
proposed. During normal walking, the robot is controlled using a
conventional admittance control scheme. When the tendency of a
fall is detected, the robot will immediately react to prevent the user
from falling down. A simple and low-cost wearable sensor system
is proposed to measure online the Center of Gravity of the user.
From comparison experiments with a reference optical system it
is found that the measurement error is acceptable especially at the
early stage of fall event. Experiments demonstrate the validity of
the proposed strategy.
In paper Oh et al., a generalized control framework is proposed
to incorporate the various assistive control methods in one general
controller structure, which consists of Feedforward Disturbance
Compensation Control, Reference Tracking Feedback Control,
Reference Tracking Feedforward Control and Model-based Torque
Control. The proposed control framework is designed by taking
into consideration the linearity of each control algorithm, and thus
it enables the continuous and smooth switching of assistive control
algorithms, enabling a complete analysis of control stability. The
proposed method is implemented into a lower-limb exoskeleton
robot and is verified by experimental results.
The paper Novak et al., presents a review of existing sensor fusion methods for wearable robots, both stationary ones such as
rehabilitation exoskeletons and portable ones such as active prostheses and full-body exoskeletons. Fusion methods are first presented as applied to individual sensing modalities (primarily
electromyography, electroencephalography and mechanical sensors), and then four approaches to combining multiple modalities
are presented. The strengths and weaknesses of the different methods are compared, and recommendations are made for future sensor fusion research.
In paper Basteris et al., authors show results of the adaptation
process in a study involving seven persons with chronic stroke who
completed a six-weeks training in their homes. Based on the patterns observed in difficulty and lag–lead score, they defined five
session types (challenging, challenging-then supporting, supporting, under-supporting and under-challenging). Authors show that

the mechanism of adaptation has been effective in 195 of 248 sessions. Authors propose the lag–lead based assessment and adaptation as an auto-tuning tool for machine based exercise, with
particular focus on rehabilitation robotics. Also, the classification
of sessions among different types can be applied to other studies
in order to better understanding the progression of therapy in order to maximize its outcome.
In paper Rajasekaran et al., authors propose and evaluate
an adaptive control strategy for robotic rehabilitation therapies
to guarantee static stability using a wearable robot. Authors
have used a 6-degree-of-freedom planar lower-limb exoskeleton,
namely H1. The developed control strategy has been designed to
provide the necessary assistance, related to balance recovery and
postural stability, under the assist-as-needed paradigm. The interaction forces between orthosis and subject are monitored, as they
play a relevant role in the definition of assistive and resistive movements to be applied to the joints. The proposed method has been
tested with 5 healthy subjects in the presence of internal and external disturbances. The results demonstrate that knowing the stability limit of each subject, in combination with a therapeutically
selected scaling factor, the proposed adaptive control helps in providing an effective assistance in therapy. This method is efficient in
handling the individual and combined effect of external perturbations acting on any joint movements.
In paper Giovacchini et al., authors present a light-weight active
orthosis endowed with two series elastic actuators for hip flexion–
extension assistance. Along with the description of its mechatronic
modules, authors report the experimental characterization of the
performance of the actuation and control system, as well as the
usability test carried out with a healthy subject. Results from the
tests with the healthy subject proved the overall system usability:
the subject could walk with the device without being hindered and
while he received a smooth assistive flexion–extension torque profile on both hip articulations.
In paper Karavas et al., a tele-impedance based assistive control
scheme for a knee exoskeleton device is presented. The proposed
controller captures the user’s intent to generate task-related assistive torques by means of the exoskeleton in different phases of
the subject’s normal activity. To do so, a detailed musculoskeletal
model of the human knee is developed and experimentally calibrated to best match the users kinematic and dynamic behavior.
Three dominant antagonistic muscle pairs are used in the proposed
model, in which electromyography (EMG) signals are acquired,
processed and used for the estimation of the knee joint torque, trajectory and the stiffness trend, in real time. The estimated stiffness
trend is then scaled and mapped to a task-related stiffness interval
to agree with the desired degree of assistance. The desired stiffness
and equilibrium trajectories are then tracked by the exoskeletons
impedance controller. As a consequence, while minimum muscular
activity corresponds to low stiffness, i.e. highly transparent motion,
higher co-contractions result in a stiffer joint and a greater level of
assistance. A study of the dynamics of the human–exoskeleton system is conducted to evaluate the robustness of the proposed technique while the stability in the steady state and transient condition
is investigated.
In paper Polygerinos et al., a portable, assistive, soft robotic
glove designed to augment hand rehabilitation for individuals with
functional grasp pathologies, is presented. The robotic glove utilizes soft actuators consisting of molded elastomeric chambers
with fiber reinforcements that induce specific bending, twisting
and extending trajectories under fluid pressurization. These soft
actuators were mechanically programmed to match and support
the range of motion of individual fingers. They demonstrated the
ability to generate significant force when pressurized and exhibited low impedance when unactuated. To operate the soft robotic
glove, a control hardware system was designed and included fluidic pressure sensors in line with the hydraulic actuators and a

Editorial / Robotics and Autonomous Systems 73 (2015) 1–3

closed-loop controller to regulate the pressure. Demonstrations
with the complete system were performed to evaluate the ability
of the soft robotic glove to carry out gross and precise functional
grasping. Compared to existing devices, the proposed soft robotic
glove has the potential to increase user freedom and independence
through its portable waist belt pack and open palm design.
In paper Asbeck et al., a hip-assistance exosuit, which is the first
soft system to actuate hip extension, and the first portable device
to augment the hip alone, is presented. Authors utilize a backpack
frame to attach to the torso, and use a spooled-webbing actuator
to apply forces to the thigh. The device creates hip torques in the
sagittal plane of up to 30% of the nominal biological torques for
level-ground walking. Due to its soft design, the system does not
restrict the motion of the hip in the ab- and adduction directions
or rotation about the leg axis. Authors also present initial measurements of the system in use during walking on level-ground.
In paper Olivier et al., two assistive orthoses which use different
types of actuation mechanisms are presented and discussed. The
first one is based on a ball screw and an excavator-like mechanism
while the second one is based on a double differential actuation.
Their technical capabilities are compared and contextualized for
diverse activities. Objective characteristics such as the range of
motion of the devices, the transparency, the maximal torque that
they can provide or the RMS torque during cyclic trajectories are
compared to point out which device is better adapted for specific
situations.
In paper Flynn et al., the development of the CYBERLEGs AlphaPrototype prosthesis, a new transfemoral prosthesis incorporating
a new variable stiffness ankle actuator based on the MACCEPA architecture, a passive knee with two locking mechanisms, and an
energy transfer mechanism that harvests negative work from the
knee and delivers it to the ankle to assist pushoff, is presented.
The CYBERLEGs Alpha-Prosthesis is part of the CYBERLEGs FP7-ICT
project, which combines a prosthesis system to replace a lost limb
in parallel with an exoskeleton to assist the sound leg, and sensory
array to control both systems. The prosthesis attempts to produce
a natural level-ground walking gait that approximates the joint
torques and kinematics of a non-amputee while maintaining compliant joints, which has the potential to decrease impulsive losses,
and ultimately reduce the end-user energy consumption. This first
prototype consists of a passive knee and an active ankle which are
energetically coupled to reduce the total power consumption of
the device. Authors present simulations of the actuation system of
the ankle and the passive behavior of the knee module with and
without the energy transfer effects, the mechanical design of the
prosthesis, and empirical results from testing of the physical device with amputee subjects.

3

In paper del-Ama et al., three case studies for investigating the
feasibility of the hybrid therapy of walking delivered with Kinesis
in patients with incomplete spinal cord injury are presented. Besides, the adaptability of the proposed hybrid system are tested,
characterizing the behavior of the cooperative controller during
delivery of gait therapy. Patients with incomplete spinal cord injury participated in the experiments. The protocol consisted of
walking with Kinesis during 6 min. Three configurations of the cooperative controller were tested for each patient in separate sessions in order to investigate its adaptability features. Results show
that the cooperative controller of Kinesis adapted to patient functional deficits and voluntary actions during walking, modulating
stimulation and robotic assistance, which was the aim of the controller design. The authors report that no noticeable differences
were observed in the comparison between compliant and trajectory exoskeleton control. The hybrid walking therapy was tolerated by the patients without adverse effects, along with a tolerable
physical demand.
Acknowledgments
The guest editors wish to express their thanks to Prof. Ruediger Dillmann, the Editor in Chief of Robotics and Autonomous Systems, for giving us the opportunity to publish this Special Issue.
We greatly appreciated the responsiveness of Christine Brand, Jafar
Ali Mohideen and Hilda Xu for their continuous support and help
throughout the submission and review process. The guest editors
wish also to express their gratitude to the Program Committee
members of the RoboAssist 2013 symposium as well as the external reviewers who kindly accepted our invitation and provided
rigorous and thorough reviews for the papers submitted to this
Special Issue.
Nicola Vitiello ∗
The BioRobotics Institute, Scuola Superiore Sant’Anna, viale Rinaldo
Piaggio 34-56025 Pontedera, Italy
E-mail address: n.vitiello@sssup.it.
Samer Mohammed
LISSI Lab., University of Paris-Est Créteil, (UPEC), Rue Paul Armangot
122-94400 Vitry S/Seine, France
Juan C. Moreno
Neural Rehabilitation Group, Cajal Institute, Spanish National
Research Council (CSIC), Av. Doctor Arce 37-28002 Madrid, Spain
∗ Corresponding editor.

