Robotics and Autonomous Systems 73 (2015) 44–58

Contents lists available at ScienceDirect

Robotics and Autonomous Systems
journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/robot

Hybrid therapy of walking with Kinesis overground robot for persons
with incomplete spinal cord injury: A feasibility study✩
Antonio J. del-Ama a,∗ , Ángel Gil-Agudo a , Elisabeth Bravo-Esteban a ,
Soraya Pérez-Nombela a , José L. Pons b , Juan C. Moreno b
a

Biomechanics and Technical Aids Unit, National Hospital for Spinal Cord Injury, Toledo, Spain

b

Neural Engineering Group, Cajal Institute, Spanish National Research Council, Madrid, Spain

highlights
•
•
•
•

We investigate the feasibility of providing the hybrid therapy of walking with Kinesis hybrid exoskeleton.
We compare and investigate the role of the stimulation and the compliant robot control.
Three case studies are presented. The cooperative controller of Kinesis adapted to patients and voluntary actions.
No noticeable differences were observed between compliant and trajectory control.

article

info

Article history:
Available online 11 November 2014
Keywords:
Incomplete spinal cord injury
Rehabilitation robot
Walking rehabilitation
Functional electrical stimulation

abstract
Rehabilitation of walking ability is one of the most important objectives after a spinal cord injury. Robotic
and neuroprosthetic technologies hold a considerable potential for driving walking rehabilitation therapies. However, new developments are needed in order to improve the walking rehabilitation interventions based in these technologies.
We recently presented a cooperative control strategy of Kinesis, a lower limb exoskeleton for providing
hybrid therapy of walking (Del-Ama, 2014). Its design aimed to actively manage muscle fatigue caused
by surface electrical stimulation, and to implement the assist-as-needed control paradigm in which
both stimulation and robotic controller cooperate with the residual functionality of the user. In this
article we present three case studies for investigating the feasibility of the hybrid therapy of walking
delivered with Kinesis in patients with incomplete spinal cord injury. Besides, the adaptability features of
Kinesis stimulation–robot cooperative control are assessed, characterizing the behavior of the cooperative
controller while providing hybrid therapy of walking.
Patients with incomplete spinal cord injury participated in the experiments. The protocol consisted
of walking with Kinesis during 6 min. Three configurations of the cooperative controller were tested for
each patient in separate sessions in order to investigate its adaptability features. The immediate impact
of the hybrid therapy of walking was assessed through several variables that represent the physiological
impact, user–exoskeleton physical interaction, stimulation intensity and user subjective perception of the
hybrid therapy of walking.
Results show that the cooperative controller of Kinesis adapted to patient functional deficits and
voluntary actions during walking, modulating stimulation and robotic assistance, which was the aim of
the controller design. Nevertheless, no noticeable differences were observed in the comparison between
compliant and trajectory exoskeleton control. Further work is envisioned regarding several aspects
of hybrid walking control: stimulation control based on muscle activation estimate, improved semiautomatic control of walking, and improved muscle fatigue monitoring. The hybrid walking therapy was
tolerated by the patients without adverse effects, along with a tolerable physical demand. This shows a
potential for walking rehabilitation in motor incomplete SCI patients, guaranteeing further research on
this topic.
© 2014 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

✩ This work was supported by grant CSD2009-00067 HYPER-CONSOLIDER
INGENIO 2010. The authors thank all the participants who volunteered for the
experiments, and the clinical staff from National Hospital for Spinal Cord Injury.

http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.robot.2014.10.014
0921-8890/© 2014 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

∗

Corresponding author.
E-mail address: ajdela@sescam.jccm.es (A.J. del-Ama).

A.J. del-Ama et al. / Robotics and Autonomous Systems 73 (2015) 44–58

45

1. Introduction
Spinal Cord Injury (SCI) is any alteration of the spinal cord
that affects the sensory-motor and autonomous systems under the
level of lesion [1]. It is a devastating clinical circumstance due to
the functional loss resulting, impacting on the functional independence of the person. The absence of spontaneous recovery and
the lack of a cure, makes the SCI a serious social, economic and
physical problem. Rehabilitation of SCI is aimed towards maximization of user independence and adequate management of secondary lesion-related diseases [2]. Maximization of mobility has
been identified as one of the main objectives for the injured individuals [3], regardless of other important functions.
Most therapies for rehabilitation of walking rely on the assumption that task-oriented practice promotes mechanisms of neural
plasticity, muscle strength and learning of compensation strategies
that increase walking ability [4,5]. Robotic technology has emerged
as response to therapist’s and therapeutic needs. Robotic technology can automate movement training, replicating some features of therapist’s manual assistance, delivering intense training.
Besides, robotic technology can offer new control and assessment
methods that are beyond hands-on methods [4]. The assist-asneeded (AAN) control paradigm emerged to encourage the active motion of the patients, modulating the robotic assistance
depending on the magnitude of the deviation of the gait trajectory,
which can be generated for each patient and gait scenario separately [6,7]. However, the efficacy of robotic systems for walking
rehabilitation is controversial, providing in the better cases similar functional outcomes than conventional therapy [8–10]. Several
recommendations have been recently proposed for further design
of improved robotic-driven rehabilitation interventions, exploiting
the environmental context of the gait training and implementation
of combinational approaches, among others [11–13]. In this sense,
ambulatory robots that have been developed mainly for functional
compensation of walking can offer a challenging and rich walking
therapy, putting the patients in a real-world context, in which environmental challenges can be overcome and are highly motivating.
An example of a combinational approach is the hybrid exoskeletons, reviewed in [14]. These devices combine neuroprosthetic and
robotic technologies in a single system, providing hybrid therapy of
walking, exploiting the advantages of each technology while mitigating the respective disadvantages. The use of functional electrical stimulation (FES) has been widely investigated as alternate
for rehabilitation and compensation of motor disorders [15,16].
The artificial activation of paralyzed muscles with a functional aim
provides several physiological and psychological benefits, which
are dependent on the nature of the injury [8]. However, FES poses
several unresolved limitations that prevent its use for rehabilitation or functional compensation of walking. The low performance
achieved by artificially stimulated muscles needs long training
periods prior to implementing a walking-related intervention
[17,18]. Furthermore, the multi-dimensionality of the muscle–
skeletal system, the non-linear characteristic of muscle activation
and the dramatic effect of muscle fatigue are also the main concerns of FES [19–21].
In this context, hybrid exoskeletons are regarded as a promising approach that blends complementary robotic and neuroprosthetic technologies. Initially developed in an attempt of
optimizing the energy requirements (and therefore the overall
weight) of lower limb ambulatory exoskeletons, hybrid exoskeletons hold a considerable potential for driving gait rehabilitation
interventions. The robotic exoskeleton can manage the unavoidable loss of performance of FES-driven muscles due to muscle fatigue, providing accurate control of joint trajectories. Besides, the
assist-as-needed control strategy applied within the redundant

Fig. 1. Experimental setup for walking experiments.

neuroprosthetic–robotic system can promote a cooperative behavior between the systems and the patient, optimizing the outcome
of the active control of the lower limb motion while providing assistance during ambulatory walking.
We recently presented a cooperative control strategy of a lower
limb exoskeleton for providing hybrid therapy of walking [22,23].
Kinesis, the name of the robotic exoskeleton, aimed to actively
manage muscle fatigue caused by surface electrical stimulation,
along with an implementation of the AAN control paradigm
in which both stimulation and robotic assistance cooperate
with the residual functionality of the user. Kinesis design and
control approach is extensively described in [22,23] along with
experimental results of a validation study conducted with healthy
volunteers. The objective of this article is to investigate the
feasibility of the hybrid therapy of walking delivered with Kinesis
in patients with incomplete spinal cord injury. Besides, the
adaptability features of Kinesis FES-robot cooperative control are
assessed, characterizing the behavior of the cooperative controller
while providing hybrid therapy of walking.
2. Material and methods
2.1. Description of Kinesis lower limb exoskeleton
Kinesis is a lower limb rehabilitation robot designed for providing hybrid therapy of walking to patients with incomplete spinal
cord injury (Fig. 1). Specifically, Kinesis targets patients whose
prognosis of functional recovery of walking is that patients can
walk short distances but depend on the wheelchair for community ambulation [24]. Therefore, a successful overground hybrid
walking therapy may provide benefits to this population. The inclusion criteria considered patients with low level of spinal cord injury, whose functional characteristics of the lesion in relation to the
walking function were: (a) preserved hip flexion ability, (b) partial
ability to generate voluntary knee extension, (c) paralysis of ankle
joint and (d) presence of mild to severe spasticity.
Kinesis is a knee–ankle–foot robotic orthosis. Hip actuation was
discarded due to preservation of hip functionality of the patients.
The knee joint features a bio-inspired mechanism which mimics the displacement of the physiological knee joint, improving
the kinematic compatibility with respect to a hinge joint. More

46

A.J. del-Ama et al. / Robotics and Autonomous Systems 73 (2015) 44–58

Fig. 2. Control scheme of Kinesis. A finite-state machine (showed in detail in Fig. 3) manages the walking phases, triggering the kinematic patterns (dashed lines) that are
imposed on the user through a force-field as explained in the text, and the stimulation controller (dashed lines), which stimulates knee muscles depending on the walking
phase and the estate in the cycle-domain (dotted lines, see Figs. 3 and 4 and the text for a details). Load response state is included to allow for adequate adaptation of stiffness
between swing and stance phases. αa is actual knee angle, αd is patterned knee angle, τd means imposed interaction torque, and τa means actual interaction torque.

details regarding the design and implementation of the mechanism can be found in [25,26]. A robotic actuator comprised a 90
W direct-current Maxon flat motor, an Harmonic-Drive gear 100:1
reduction, and a potentiometer for joint position measure, was implemented over the knee joint. The ankle joint comprises an elastic
actuator that avoids drop-foot during swing. A four-gauge bridge
placed over the metal frame allows monitoring leg–robot interaction forces. Force-sensing resistors (FSR) placed under the heel and
barefoot are placed at the foot insole for monitoring foot–ground
contact. A PC-controlled stimulator (Rehastim, Hasomed) is implemented in Kinesis, for delivering stimulation to knee extensor
(Vastus Lateralis, Rectus Femoris) and flexor (Biceps Femoris,
Semimembranosous) muscles. Knee joint actuation is then regarded
hybrid, accordingly to the definition proposed in [14].
Adaptability is the key characteristic of Kinesis cooperative
(neuroprosthesis–robot) control. The controller scheme is shown
in Fig. 2. A finite-state machine (shown in detail in Fig. 3) manages
the walking states upon the information received from the FSR,
the actual knee angle and the hand buttons. Knee kinematics
is controlled through a linear force-field around the patterned
trajectory. The interaction controller shown in Fig. 2 calculates a
torque value following Eq. (1). The calculated torque τd is displayed
to the user through an impedance controller.

τd = Kkphase · (αd − αa ) + Ck ·

∆ (αd − αa )
.
∆t

(1)

The stiffness of the force field (Kkphase in Eq. (1)) is modulated
from stance to swing phase of walking as follows. For stance phase
the displayed stiffness is high for providing stable support and
avoiding knee collapse, although a small and compliant knee bending is allowed. This stiffness is fixed for every stance phase of walking. The stiffness for this phase was estimated from torque–angle
values from normative database of gait (quasi-stiffness) [25] (Cqs
in Eq. (2)). Along with the displayed stiffness, the stimulation controller of the knee extensor muscles supports joint control, by stimulating the muscles when the knee bends over the exoskeleton

structure, measured by the interaction sensor.


Kkphase =

Cqs ,

P · αa,max − 60 ,

if phase is stance
if phase is swing.

(2)

On the contrary, for the swing phase, the stiffness is modulated
depending on the contribution of the leg to the movement, as
sensed by the interaction sensor. The hypothesis that supports
this strategy is that an increase/decrease in the leg movement will
result in a decrease/increase on the interaction forces, thus less
assistance from the exoskeleton is needed. Due to the compliance
of the exoskeleton displayed during swing phase, the contribution
of the muscles is reflected in the actual maximum angle achieved
during swing phase. Therefore, based on the values of the actual
maximum angle during swing phase, modulation of the stiffness
for the next step is performed, resulting in a proportional closedloop control of the stiffness in the cycle domain, as shown in Eq.
(2) (KkS wing ). In this equation, P is the proportional gain, and 60°
is the maximum knee joint angle of the kinematic pattern for
swing phase. This strategy enables the optimization of the muscleinduced movement rather than constraining the final movement
to a fixed trajectory, allowing for the contribution of stimulated
muscles and passive dynamics to swing and move over a range of
speeds.
Muscle fatigue due to stimulation is specifically managed in
a two-fold approach. First, closed-loop control of stimulation allows customizing FES parameters to the task and the functional
abilities of the patient. The stimulation controller features a proportional–integral–derivative (PID) control of knee extensor muscles during stance and an iterative learning controller (ILC) for the
knee flexor muscles during swing phases of walking. Second, muscle fatigue of knee flexor muscles due to stimulation is monitored
through the interaction force sensors. An ad-hoc criteria for estimation and management muscle fatigue developed previously by
our group is implemented in Kinesis [27,28] (Muscle Fatigue Estimator, MFE). Essentially, the criteria relate muscle fatigue due to

A.J. del-Ama et al. / Robotics and Autonomous Systems 73 (2015) 44–58

47

Fig. 3. Finite-state machine implemented in Kinesis. c-FSM refers to the state-machine showed in Fig. 4. Modulation of stiffness and muscle fatigue monitoring during swing
phase is performed within the c-FSM as showed in the text.

Fig. 4. Finite state machine for operation in cycle-domain. This is only active for
swing phases of walking.

the stimulation parameters obtained after convergence of the ILC
are held, and the cooperative controller reduces robotic assistance
while monitoring the muscle fatigue, as explained above. A detailed description of fatigue estimation and specific modulation of
stimulation parameters, along with a detailed description of Kinesis design is available in [27,28,22,23].
Safety measures were implemented in Kinesis. First, mechanical stops in the physiological limits of motion were placed in the
ankle and knee robotic joints. In addition to this, the admittance
controller of the knee joint was programmed with a software limit
at maximum and minimum positions. In case of exceeding these
limits, the state machine locked the motor shaft, and moved it to
a default safe position. A third software safety measure consisted
on the limitation of the maximum output torque required to the
motor. An equivalent safe strategy was implemented in the stimulation controller to set output limits for pulse width and amplitude modulation. Finally, a mechanical safety button was enabled
to physically disconnect the energy supply of the entire hardware
system. A risk analysis and pilot experiments with healthy users
were conducted to verify the adequate actuation and response of
the safety measures before actually moving to the experimental
evaluation.
2.2. Experimental protocol

stimulation with increases in leg–robot interaction forces. Accordingly to our work, an increment above 19% is indicative of fatigue
for the knee flexor muscles; then a reduction in stimulation frequency delays the loss of flexor muscle force production.
In order to uncouple closed-loop of stimulation from muscle
fatigue monitoring of swing phases of walking, and to modulate
force field stiffness during the swing phase, Kinesis features a
finite-state machine that operates by monitoring average values
gathered during the swing phase, thus operating within the cycle
domain (Fig. 4). This design allowed uncoupling the closed-loop
control of flexor muscles stimulation from fatigue monitoring, and
decreasing the assistance of the exoskeleton during this phase. Two
states were implemented in this state-machine: learning, while
the ILC controller iterates among cycles, and monitoring, in which

Fig. 5 shows the entire experimental protocol designed to
investigate the feasibility of providing hybrid therapy of walking
with Kinesis. There were three sessions in which a walking
experiment was conducted, varying the control characteristics of
Kinesis: compliant robotic assistance and stimulation, in order to
assess the adaptability features of the control approach, as well as
the effect of the stimulation in the hybrid configuration. Thus, the
hybrid-cooperative control configuration was compared against
trajectory control with stimulation (HP in Fig. 5), and against
cooperative (compliant) robotic assistance without stimulation
(CO in Fig. 5).
For all experiments, the participants had to walk with Kinesis
during 6 min in a straight line, which was performed in a single

48

A.J. del-Ama et al. / Robotics and Autonomous Systems 73 (2015) 44–58

Fig. 5. Experimental protocol. Each session was conducted in separate and
successive days. S: Stimulation session. The comfort threshold was obtained in
this session. T: Training session with Kinesis. HC: Hybrid-cooperative controller
configuration. For this configuration, both stimulation and robotic assistance are
modulated during walking. CO: Cooperative-only controller configuration. For
this configuration, the stimulation is disabled, thus Kinesis only brings adaptable
robotic assistance. Stimulation of extensor muscles was not disabled to provide
support during the stance phase. HP: Hybrid-stiff controller configuration. For
this configuration, stiffness of Kinesis during the swing phase is held equal to
the stiffness for the stance phase. This becomes a stiff trajectory control of knee
trajectory during swing phase.

session. Prior to this session, the participants underwent two
sessions. The first one consisted of a stimulation test (S in Fig. 5),
which lasted 15 min. During this session, the response of knee
flexor and extensor muscles to the stimulation was inspected. In
the following session (T in Fig. 5), the participants first met Kinesis,
and learned the operation of Kinesis. Operation of Kinesis was
performed with the use of a walker. Two force-sensing resistors
were employed as switches, which allowed easy placement over
the grip of the walker. Each switch triggered Kinesis to take a step.
The patients were instructed to ‘‘to take a step, bend slightly to the
contralateral side, lifting the heel prior to press the button’’, to ensure
a safe operation. In order to provide a better understanding of
adapting capabilities of Kinesis while providing walking therapy
to the patient, stimulation and robotic assistance were tested
separately incorporating two additional walking experiments,
where either the robotic assistance or the stimulation is fixed.
2.3. Data analysis
Results of the experiments are provided in both time and cycle
domains. In time domain, the evolution of patterned and actual
knee joint kinematics, stimulation for knee flexor muscles as well
as evolution of interaction forces are provided for the initial and
last periods of the walking experiments. For cycle domain, a set of
metrics was derived from the interaction forces, actual knee angle,
stiffness for the swing phase, and from the stimulation control
signal (pulse width) for both swing and stance phases.
The cycle domain variables that characterize the swing phase
were defined as follows. Time-integral of the interaction torque
during the swing and stance phases (TTI) was calculated to obtain
the average interaction torque. TTI values were then normalized
to the TTI of the first cycle (NTTI). Similarly, the normalized average of the stimulation control signal was calculated integrating the
control signal output for the entire phase, normalized by the maximum stimulation achievable, corresponding to a saturated control
output for the entire walking phase (i.e. maximum stimulation output during the entire phase, 450 µs). This normalized stimulation
intensity (NILC) gives a representative value between [0 1], where
0 means no stimulation during the walking phase, and 1 means
a constant, saturated stimulation output of 450 µs for the entire
phase. Besides, exoskeleton stiffness modulation during the swing
phase (Kk ) and the maximum knee angle achieved during the swing
phase were also obtained. Similarly, NILC was also obtained following the same procedure for stance phase, but using the values
generated during stance.
Total distance and time to walk the first 10 m were obtained for
each walking test. Besides, blood pressure (BP) and heart rate (HR)
were measured immediately prior and after the walking tests. Participant’s perceived pain, fatigue and comfort were also assessed
through a visual-analog scale [29] (VAS). The participant rated its
perceived sensation regarding these three items immediately prior

and after the walking experiment. Besides, the items of the Quebec User Evaluation of Satisfaction with Assistive Technology [30]
(QUEST) questionnaire related with system performance, were also
included for evaluation of the participant’s experience with the use
of Kinesis.
The protocol was revised and approved by the Ethics Review
Board of the National Hospital for Spinal Cord Injury. All participants were given information about the procedure and provided
written consent.
3. Results
Seven patients were recruited to participate in the experiments.
There were four dropouts at different stages of the protocol.
One patient developed neuropathic pain after the stimulation test
session, not related to the experimental procedure; two patients
were discharged during the procedure, and the fourth patient
abandoned adducing time shortage. The data from the three
patients who completed the entire procedure are presented here.
This section is organized in four sub-sections. First, data from
every patient and experimental configuration are presented in the
form of case study (Sections 3.1–3.3). Only relevant information is
provided in order to reduce paper length and increase readability.
The fourth section presents the grouped data regarding functional
performance (distance walked in 6 min and time after the first
10 m), physiological impact (pre- and post- heart rate and blood
pressure) and user perception (VAS for pain, fatigue, comfort, and
QUEST questionnaire).
3.1. Case study 1
Patient 1 is a male of 35 y.o., 65 kg and 1.8 m height with a SCI
L5 AIS [31] D. He had lower extremities paralysis resulting in mild
walking impairment, of which the functional characteristics met
the inclusion criteria. A secondary consequence of the lesion was
impaired balance during left leg stance.
3.1.1. Hybrid-cooperative control of walking (HC)
The time-evolution of knee patterned and actual kinematics, interaction forces and the ILC stimulation output for the flexor muscles for both legs during walking with the HC are depicted in Fig. 6.
The stimulation output for extensor muscles was not included for
representation purposes, although it is further analyzed in Fig. 8.
Knee kinematics of both legs were successfully controlled,
and there were no dangerous situations reported during the
experiment. Stimulation of left leg flexor muscles during swing
(Fig. 6(a), black curve) was significantly lower than for the right leg
(Fig. 6(b)), where the stimulation provided was close to a saturated
output for the entire phase. Besides, it is noticeable the hyperextension pattern of the right leg during stance phases, which
increases prior to swing initiation (Fig. 6(b), light blue curves).
The hyper-extension posture during stance was reflected in the
interaction forces (same figures, red curve, extension is negative).
Extensor interaction forces were also observed during swing phase
of the right leg.
Fig. 7 shows the cycle-related variables for the HC experiment.
Comparing Fig. 7(a) and (b) the differences in the functional status
of both legs can be noticed, which impacts on the stimulation
intensity and the stiffness of the exoskeleton. The stimulation
intensity (NILC, black curve) for the left leg was lower than for the
right (maximum reached: 40% for the left, 97% for the right), and
the first learning period took more steps. Interestingly, after the
first muscle fatigue detection of the left leg (cycle 20), the second
learning period led to a lower stimulation intensity, while the
normalized torque–time integral of the interaction forces (NTTI)
further decreased during the second monitoring period (cycles

A.J. del-Ama et al. / Robotics and Autonomous Systems 73 (2015) 44–58

(a) Left leg.

49

(b) Right leg.

Fig. 6. Results from HC experiment in time-domain. Pattern (blue curve, deg) and actual (light blue curve, deg) knee kinematics, interaction force (red curve, N m/deg,
flexion positive) and stimulation control signal of knee flexor muscles (black curve, µs, ILC only showed). (For interpretation of the references to color in this figure legend,
the reader is referred to the web version of this article.)

(a) Left leg.

(b) Right leg.

Fig. 7. Results from HC experiment in cycle domain. Controller stiffness (magenta curve, N m/deg), maximum angle achieved during flexion (blue curve, deg) normalized
torque–time integral of the interaction forces (NTTI, red curve), and normalized stimulation control signal for knee flexion muscles (NILC, black curve) of both legs for the
entire walking experiment. Green boxes show learning state active. No box means monitoring state active. Controller stiffness, maximum angle and normalized stimulation
curves are scaled for representation purposes. (For interpretation of the references to color in this figure legend, the reader is referred to the web version of this article.)

The evolution of the stiffness during the swing phases (Fig. 7(a)
and (b) magenta curves) also reflects the differences between both
legs. The stiffness for the left leg was progressively reduced during
the monitoring periods, while the stiffness for the right leg could
not be reduced, although the stimulation was high and a reduction
in NTTI was achieved.
Fig. 8 shows the averaged normalized quadriceps stimulation
intensity for the stance phases of the experiment for both legs. It
can be clearly noticed that the stimulation of the right leg muscles
was almost unnecessary, and a progressive increase is observed for
the left leg. Again, the impaired balance perception of the subject
during left leg stance had impact here, although the stimulation
intensity achieved was likely to produce functional contractions.
Fig. 8. Normalized stimulation control signal for knee extensor muscles during
stance phases of walking for HC experiment. Data from both legs.

25–29). This decrease could not be attributed to stimulation effect,
because the pulse duration was low to produce muscle contraction
(10% of NILC. See also Fig. 6(a)). This finding can be attributed to
voluntary muscle activation. A further increase on NTTI is observed
for the last 5 cycles of the experiment, due in this case to an
increase on muscle fatigue.
There was a marked reduction in the interaction force for both
legs, up to a 40% of the initial TTI. The stimulation was considerably
high for the right leg, above the 80% of the maximum stimulation
achievable, for almost the entire experiment (Fig. 7(b), black curve,
cycles 4–27). A decay on muscle performance was detected at cycle
10, probably due to the fatigue produced by the high stimulation
intensity reached in the first iteration period (Fig. 7(b), cycles 1–5).
The second iteration took a longer period (cycles 11–18), achieving
a similar reduction in TTI than for the first period (Fig. 7(b), red
curve, cycle 21). As in the case of the left leg, an increase on TTI is
observed for the last 5 cycles of the experiment.

3.1.2. No stimulation, cooperative control of walking (CO)
Similarly to the HC experiment, results for this experiment
show the same hyper-extension posture of the right leg along with
the extensor interaction forces shown in Fig. 6. Thus the figures
corresponding to this configuration have been omitted.
Regarding the cycle domain variables, the absence of stimulation in this experiment was reflected on changes on the NTTI values
for the right leg. It can be observed that the NTTI oscillates among 1
and 1.2, due to the trend to extend the leg of the patient, while the
stiffness is slightly reduced (Fig. 9(b), red curve). Regarding the left
leg, an interesting finding is noticed (Fig. 9(a)). The stiffness was
decreased up to 0 N m/deg. This indicates that the exoskeleton assistance was reduced in order to follow the trajectory voluntarily
exerted by the patient, without impeding the movement. This led
to insufficient swing knee flexion in some cycles (19, 24, 25, blue
curve).
Similarly to the HC, the quadriceps stimulation for the stance
phase for CO experiment was not significative, thus the figure
corresponding to this configuration has been omitted.

50

A.J. del-Ama et al. / Robotics and Autonomous Systems 73 (2015) 44–58

(a) Left leg.

(b) Right leg.

Fig. 9. CO experiment results in cycle domain. See the caption of Fig. 7 for legend details. (For interpretation of the references to color in this figure legend, the reader is
referred to the web version of this article.)

(a) Left leg.

(b) Right leg.

Fig. 10. HP experiment results in cycle domain. See the caption of Fig. 7 for legend details. (For interpretation of the references to color in this figure legend, the reader is
referred to the web version of this article.)

3.1.3. Hybrid-stiff control of walking (HP)
Similarly to the HC and CO, knee kinematics was successfully
controlled during the entire experiment and the required stimulation for the right knee flexor muscles was higher than for the left
leg muscles, similarly to Fig. 6. The figures corresponding to this
configuration have been thus omitted.
In this experiment, similar results to the HC regarding the cycledomain variables (Fig. 10) were obtained. The stimulation for the
left leg was considerably low, inefficient for muscle activation.
The first iteration period took the first 4 cycles, and the NTTI did
not decrease. During the first monitoring period (cycles 5–7) the
NTTI increased. Nevertheless, after the second iterating period the
NILC increased slightly, but still inefficiently to provide muscle
activation, and the NTTI decreased for the remaining experiment.
Regarding the right leg, similarly to the HC experiment, the
stimulation increased rapidly (Fig. 10(b), black curve). A decrease
on NTTI was observed for the first 8 cycles and a increase for the
remaining 6 cycles of the learning period. After convergence, the
NTTI remained stable.
Similarly to the HC and CO experiments, the average stimulation for the stance phases of both legs was not significant. The similarity between results led us to omit the figure corresponding to
this configuration.
3.2. Case study 2
Patient 2 is a male of 43 y.o., 75 kg and 1.77 m height, with
a SCI L4 AIS grade D. As consequence of the accident, the patient
had a passive limitation on the articular range of both knees, which
caused to adapt the kinematic pattern of the left leg to meet these

limits. The joint angle for the stance phase of the left leg was set
at the maximum knee extension angle (20°), and the kinematic
pattern for the swing phase was consequently adapted.
The differences between both legs on the joint angle for the
stance phase influenced the results for all configurations, as shown
in next sections. These differences induced the patient to stance
and walk with a leaned posture, due to the differences between
the flexion angles of the legs. In the stimulation test a reduced
performance of the left leg flexor muscles was noticed.
3.2.1. Hybrid-cooperative control of walking (HC)
Fig. 11(a) shows the kinematic pattern designed to meet
patient’s left knee angular limitation (blue curve). Looking at the
right leg, high interaction forces towards flexion during stance
were appreciated (Fig. 11(b) red curve). These forces have effect
on the kinematics, where the right knee is flexed during stance.
In contrast, the interaction forces of the left leg during stance
were significative lower, and the actual knee angle during stance
remained close to the reference. Transition from stance to swing
phase of the right leg resulted also in a transition of the interaction
forces from flexor direction for stance, to markedly extensor
direction for swing. Stimulation of flexor muscles for both legs
exhibited in general a saturated pattern for the swing phase (black
curves).
Maximum flexion angle of the right leg for the first learning
period is observed below the objective of 60° for the swing
phase (Fig. 12(b), blue curve). This was further compensated
during the first monitoring period by an increase in the stiffness
(Fig. 12(b)). The stimulation pattern of both legs in the cycledomain is summarized in Figs. 12(a) and (b). NILC for both legs

A.J. del-Ama et al. / Robotics and Autonomous Systems 73 (2015) 44–58

(a) Left leg.

51

(b) Right leg.

Fig. 11. Results from HC experiment in time-domain. See Fig. 6 for legend details. (For interpretation of the references to color in this figure legend, the reader is referred
to the web version of this article.)

(a) Left leg.

(b) Right leg.

Fig. 12. HC experiment results in cycle domain. See the caption of Fig. 7 for legend details. (For interpretation of the references to color in this figure legend, the reader is
referred to the web version of this article.)

Fig. 13. Normalized stimulation control signal for knee extensor muscles during
stance phases of walking for HC experiment. Data from both legs.

achieved the 70% of the maximum achievable stimulation intensity
for the swing phase. After the first learning period of the right
leg, a decrease on NTTI is observed along with an increase on
the stiffness. In cycle 27 fatigue was detected and a new learning
period took place (Fig. 12(b)).
Regarding the left leg, a more moderated increase on stimulation intensity (Fig. 12, black curve) for the first learning period was
observed, reaching similar stimulation intensity than for the right
leg, corresponding with a decrease on NTTI. After the learning period, the stiffness was slightly reduced.
Fig. 13 shows the averaged quadriceps stimulation intensity for
the stance phases, for both legs. The high stimulation intensity
applied to the right leg is noticeable, in response to the flexion
posture exhibited by the patient during stance phases, which is
observed to increase across cycles.
3.2.2. No stimulation, cooperative control of walking (CO)
Knee kinematics, interaction forces and flexor stimulation
during the HP experiment are similar to results from the HC

experiment in the time domain (Fig. 11), and no new findings were
noticed.
Regarding the cycle-domain variables for the left leg (Fig. 14(a)),
a decrease on NTTI for the first 17 cycles was observed (red
curve), along with a decrease on the stiffness (magenta curve). A
progressive increase on NTTI and a stabilization of the stiffness
were observed from the 17th cycle to the end of the experiment.
Cycle-domain results for the right leg (Fig. 14(b)) show an
increase on NTTI for the first 6 cycles. As occurred in the HC experiment, the subject reacted to the mobilization of the leg by
increasing the trend to extend the leg during swing. This was counterbalanced by the CO controller by increasing the stiffness to
achieve 60° of knee flexion during swing. After this balance between the patient and Kinesis, a stationary situation can be observed, where the NTTI increases slowly, probably due to patient
fatigue, while the stiffness remained constant.
Quadriceps stimulation intensity for this configuration exhibited the same pattern as for HC experiments (Fig. 13).
3.2.3. Hybrid-stiff control of walking (HP)
Knee kinematics, interaction forces and flexor stimulation
resulting during HP experiment were similar to results from HC
and CO experiments (Fig. 11).
Examining the cycle-domain results in Fig. 15(b), the NTTI for
right leg did not increase for the first steps, contrary to the results
with the HC experiment (Fig. 12(b)). As a result, the stimulation
intensity increased slower during the first learning period (from
cycle 1–10). The maximum angle for the swing phase was lower
than 60°, although closer than for HC experiment (Fig. 15(b), blue
curve). In this configuration the stiffness was not increased, as in
the case for the HC and CO. Regarding the left leg (Fig. 15(a)), the
cycle-domain results were similar to the HC (Fig. 12), except the
NTTI, which did not decrease as much.
The results for the averaged quadriceps stimulation intensity
for the stance phases of the HP experiment were similar to HC and

52

A.J. del-Ama et al. / Robotics and Autonomous Systems 73 (2015) 44–58

(a) Left leg.

(b) Right leg.

Fig. 14. Experiment results in cycle domain. See the caption of Fig. 7 for legend details. (For interpretation of the references to color in this figure legend, the reader is
referred to the web version of this article.)

(a) Left leg.

(b) Right leg.

Fig. 15. Experiment results in cycle domain. See the caption of Fig. 7 for legend details. (For interpretation of the references to color in this figure legend, the reader is
referred to the web version of this article.)

(a) Left leg.

(b) Right leg.
Fig. 16. Results from HC experiment in time-domain. See Fig. 6 for legend details.

CO experiments. The analysis made for the former experiments is
also applicable to these results.

almost ineffective for the right leg flexion muscles. The patient was
required to walk between parallel bars, instead of using a walker,
due to its initial limited functional ability for walking.

3.3. Case study 3
Patient 3 is a male of 40 y.o., 70 kg and 1.8 m height, with a
SCI at L1 level, AIS A. The patient had partial motor preservation at
L3 level, and partial sensitive preservation at L4 level. This lesion
represents the most impaired functional condition that meets the
inclusion criteria. In contrast to patients 1 and 2, this patient had no
volitional control over the knee flexor muscles, and some degree
of voluntary activation of the extensor muscles, although it did
not enable the patient to extend the knee. Hip flexion ability was
partially preserved for the right side, whereas the left was poorly
preserved.
During the stimulation test, it was observed that the stimulation
was ineffective for generating force with left flexor muscles, and

3.3.1. Hybrid-cooperative control of walking (HC)
Knee kinematics, interaction forces and flexor muscles stimulation for HC experiment are shown in Fig. 16. The long stance intervals correspond to the time intervals when the patient reached the
extreme of the walkway created with the bars. Hence the parallel
bars were displaced while the patient remained standing, to create
a new walkway and continue the walking experiment.
Interaction forces for the left leg were of low magnitude during
stance, whereas for the right leg were extensor during the whole
gait cycle (Fig. 16). Stimulation of flexor muscles exhibited a
saturated pattern from the first cycles of the swing phase (black
curve). This was also observed in the cycle domain, where the NILC
for the right leg after the first learning period reached close to the

A.J. del-Ama et al. / Robotics and Autonomous Systems 73 (2015) 44–58

(a) Left leg.

53

(b) Right leg.

Fig. 17. HC experiment results in cycle domain. See the caption of Fig. 7 for legend details. (For interpretation of the references to color in this figure legend, the reader is
referred to the web version of this article.)

Fig. 18. Normalized stimulation control signal for knee extensor muscles during
stance phases of walking for HC experiment. Data from both legs.

100% of the maximum achievable stimulation (Fig. 17(b)). The NTTI
shows a slow decrease (red curve) after cycle 10. Interestingly,
during the monitoring period the stiffness increased (magenta
curve).
Regarding left leg (Fig. 17(a)), after the learning period the
stimulation intensity was lower than for the right leg (85% of the
maximum achievable intensity, black curve), and the NTTI appears to vary randomly around the 1.2 in average (red curve).
The stiffness decreased at a slow pace during the monitoring
period.
Average quadriceps stimulation during the stance phase was
not intense overall for both legs (Fig. 18). Particularly the stimulation for the right leg was zero due to the extensor interaction forces
during stance.

(a) Left leg.

3.3.2. No stimulation, cooperative control of walking (CO)
Results from this experiment were similar to the HC experiment. The cycle domain results presented in Fig. 19 are also similar
to the results obtained for the HC experiment.
Regarding the cycle-domain variables, the stiffness for the left
leg (Fig. 19(a), magenta curve) decreased, thus indicating that the
leg could be successfully driven with less contribution from the
exoskeleton. However, the NTTI values did not decrease, indicating
that the patient did not contribute voluntarily to the movement
(red curve). Regarding the right leg (Fig. 19(b)), as noticed in the
HC experiment, the extensor interaction forces during swing were
counterbalanced by the CO by increasing the stiffness (magenta
curve), in order to achieve 60° of knee flexion during swing phase
(blue curve). The NTTI increased for the first 6 cycles, and decreased
for the remaining experiment.
Regarding quadriceps normalized stimulation, the results are
similar to those obtained for the HC experiment (Fig. 18).
3.3.3. Hybrid-stiff control of walking (HP)
The results from this configuration experiment are similar to HC
and CO experiments. With regard to the cycle-domain data, results
from left leg are similar to the HC experiment (Fig. 20(a)). Although
the stimulation was also intense (80% of the maximum achievable
stimulation intensity), the NTTI increased for the first half of the
experiment. Similarly to the HC experiment, this behavior could
not be attributed to any muscular action, either voluntary or
artificially induced by the stimulation.
Regarding the right leg (Fig. 20(b)), the stimulation reached a
90% of the maximum achievable stimulation. There was an initial

(b) Right leg.

Fig. 19. CO experiment results in cycle domain. See the caption of Fig. 7 for legend details. (For interpretation of the references to color in this figure legend, the reader is
referred to the web version of this article.)

54

A.J. del-Ama et al. / Robotics and Autonomous Systems 73 (2015) 44–58
Table 1
Experimental results for HC, CO and HP experiments: time to 10 m and distance in 6 min, tests
and subjective scales. Data provided for fatigue, pain, BP and HR are pre-post relative increment.
Data are mean±SD and median±range for QUEST items.

Time to 10 m (min.)
Distance in 6 min (m)
Systolic BP (mm Hg)
Diastolic BP (mm Hg)
Heart rate
(beat/min.)
Pain (cm)
Comfort (cm)
Fatigue (cm)
QUEST Item 1
QUEST Item 2
QUEST Item 3
QUEST Item 4
QUEST Item 5
QUEST Item 6
QUEST Item 7
QUEST Item 8

Healthy group [22]

HC

CO

HP

4.1 ± 1.4
15.4 ± 5.0
Not evaluated
Not evaluated
Not evaluated

3.3 ± 1.6
17.0 ± 20.2
6.7 ± 20.8
7.3 ± 15.0
6.0 ± 14.6

3.0 ± 1.5
17.3 ± 6.6
0.7 ± 24.2
0.3 ± 19.5
−0.3 ± 10.4

2.9 ± 1.4
20.2 ± 5.8
9.7 ± 18.1
1.0 ± 7.3
0.7 ± 3.7

Not evaluated
4.6 ± 1.8
5.2 ± 1.1
4.0 ± 0.0
3.5 ± 1.3
4.0 ± 0.3
3.0 ± 0.5
4.0 ± 0.5
4.0 ± 0.5
3.0 ± 0.5
Not answered

6.3 ± 17.3
2.9 ± 2.1
14.7 ± 50.5
4.0 ± 2.0
3.0 ± 1.0
3.0 ± 0.0
5.0 ± 2.0
4.0 ± 2.0
3.0 ± 2.0
3.0 ± 1.0
5.0 ± 1.0

0.33 ± 1.7
1.4 ± 1.9
1.67 ± 6.4
3.0 ± 2.0
3.0 ± 1.0
3.0 ± 0.0
5.0 ± 2.0
5.0 ± 1.0
4.0 ± 1.0
3.0 ± 0.0
5.0 ± 0.0

6.0 ± 13.0
2.5 ± 1.9
7.3 ± 18.2
4.0 ± 2.0
4.0 ± 1.0
3.0 ± 0.0
4.0 ± 1.0
5.0 ± 2.0
4.0 ± 2.0
3.0 ± 0.0
5.0 ± 0.0

(a) Left leg.

(b) Right leg.

Fig. 20. HP experiment results in cycle domain. See the caption of Fig. 7 for legend details. (For interpretation of the references to color in this figure legend, the reader is
referred to the web version of this article.)

(a) Time to the first 10 m.

(b) Distance covered in 6
min.

Fig. 21. Walking distance (6 min) and time (10 m) for HC, CO and HP. Data are
mean ± SD.

plateau for the NTTI (red curve, cycles 1–6), and a progressive
decrease was observed until the end of the experiment.
The normalized quadriceps stimulation for this experiment is
similar to the one obtained for HC and CO experiments.
3.4. Immediate effects of hybrid walking
Fig. 21 shows the group-average results for the distance covered in 6 min, and the time needed to cover the first 10 m for each
configuration. An improvement on both tests along experiments is
noticeable (Table 1). Note that the experiments are shown following temporal order. A learning effect of successive testing could
influence these results. In a previous article we presented data

corresponding to the same walking protocol (6 min in straight line)
performed by a group of four healthy volunteers [22]. Compared
with the healthy subject test for HC configuration (Table 1), patients needed less time to cover 10 m (healthy group: 4.1 ± 1.4
min.; patient group: 3.3 ± 1.6 min.), and walked more distance in
6 min (healthy group: 15.4 ± 5.0 m.; patient group: 17.0 ± 20.2
m.). The superior performance exhibited by the patients could be
influenced by their ability using the walker, along with the effect
of the preliminary training session (T in Fig. 5).
Regarding the physiological effort (Fig. 22, Table 1), the
configurations with stimulation, HC and HP, showed an increase
in the systolic and diastolic BP after the experiment. The HR only
increased after the HC experiment. An excessive time elapsed in
recording the HR after the HP experiment for one of the patients
allowed for recovering the HR, affecting the results.
Subjective perception of fatigue and pain was rated below 50%
of the full scale for all configurations tested (Fig. 23(a), Table 1).
Greater relative increments for fatigue and pain were found for HC
and HP (Table 1). Interestingly, patients consistently rated lower
‘‘pre-’’ fatigue (subjective perception of fatigue before conducting the experiment) along experiments (Fig. 23(a). HC = 10.0 ±
1.0 mm, CO = 8.0 ± 13.0 mm, HP = 1.0 ± 1.7 mm). The configurations with stimulation were rated as less comfortable (Fig. 23(c),
Table 1).
Fig. 24 and Table 1, show the group-averaged response to
the QUEST questionnaire for each tested configuration, and the
average for all configurations. Overall, the items received high
scores. The lowest scores were assigned to weight, fitting and

A.J. del-Ama et al. / Robotics and Autonomous Systems 73 (2015) 44–58

(a) Systolic BP previous and after
testing for each configuration.

(b) Diastolic BP previous and after
testing.

55

(c) HR previous and after testing
for each configuration.

Fig. 22. Physiological effort previous and after testing for each configuration. Data are mean ± SD.

(a) Previous and posterior VAS
scores for fatigue.

(b) Previous and posterior VAS
scores for pain.

(c) VAS score for
comfort.

Fig. 23. VAS scores for pain, fatigue and comfort for each configuration tested. Data are mean ± SD.

Fig. 24. Scores for QUEST questionnaire and the additional items. Data are
median ± range.

comfort (3 over 5), whereas safety, durability and efficacy were top
rated. These results indicate that the users positively perceived
utility of the system in providing walking therapy.

increased unbalance sensation and felt less confident overall. This
would increase the effort of the patient in order to keep the right
foot close to the floor.
In contrast with the right leg, the patient could voluntarily move
the left leg during walking. The actions provided by Kinesis to this
leg were delivering a low amplitude stimulation pattern, unlikely
to produce muscle contraction, and/or reducing the stiffness
during the swing phase. (The stiffness reached 0 N m/deg in the CO,
which allowed to follow the patient leg movement with a minimal
interaction with the exoskeleton.) Nevertheless, there is no
possibility to verify this hypothesis due to the fact that voluntary
and stimulated muscle activation are coupled. The stimulation
provided to the left leg calls into question the fatigue detections for
HC and HP. A false fatigue detection could occur when voluntary
contribution diminishes, which increases the interaction forces.
Note that fatigue is estimated as a consequence of decreased
muscle performance reflected in the interaction forces. Therefore,
when voluntary muscle activation is predominant, the MFE
monitors the voluntary contribution of the patient.

4. Discussion
4.2. Patient 2
4.1. Patient 1
The specific impairment of each leg has conditioned the system
performance, or in other words, the system adapted to the specific
functional characteristics, which were different for each leg. The
impaired balance perception during left leg stance led the patient
to keep the right foot close to the ground during swing. This
was reflected in the interaction forces during swing, which were
markedly extensor. The actions provided by Kinesis to the right
leg were providing intense stimulation and/or maintaining the
stiffness during the swing phase, exerting adequate kinematics and
muscle activation over the leg. The efficacy of these actions was
reflected in the reduction of the NTTI for the HC and HP, but in
the latter was less efficient. A rationale for this can be found in the
fact that the day the experiment took place, the patient reported

The specific functional deficit of patient 2 resulted in a reduced
knee range of motion for the left leg, which caused the patient
to exert compensatory actions that were counteracted by Kinesis.
During stance, the patient flexed the right knee in an attempt to
level with the flexion angle of the impaired left knee. Kinesis counteracted this by increasing the stimulation, while the displayed
stiffness was enough to provide compliant but adequate support
during stance. Nonetheless, prior to swing initiation, the patient
consistently changed the flexor trend towards extensor, in attempt
to reduce the foot clearance, similarly to patient 1 walking strategy. Likewise, the actions provided by Kinesis were to increase the
stimulation and/or the stiffness of the exoskeleton. The increase on
the NTTI after the first cycles for HC and CO can be interpreted as a
patient’s response to Kinesis actions (both stimulation and robotic)

56

A.J. del-Ama et al. / Robotics and Autonomous Systems 73 (2015) 44–58

to drive the leg through the kinematic pattern: increasing the effort to extend the leg during swing. Nevertheless, Kinesis successfully compensated these actions imposing the correct kinematic
pattern. This effect was not observed in HP, probably due to a successful adaptation of the patient to Kinesis.
4.3. Patient 3
The muscular condition of patient 3 was the most impaired
among the patients presented in this article. Among patient’s legs,
the left one had worse status than the right one, as verified at
the stimulation test, specially for the flexor muscles, where the
stimulation had no effect at all. On the other hand, this patient was
taught to walk and stand in a hyper-extension pattern, a commonly
paraplegic walking technique, to ensure safe passive stance. This
extension pattern was stronger for the right leg, due to the better
muscular status, which also influenced Kinesis control actions.
As shown in all three experiments, the hybrid exoskeleton
successfully compensated these functional deficits to achieve
walking. The right leg extension pattern had to be compensated
by increasing the stimulation (HC and HP) and also increasing the
exoskeleton stiffness (HC and CO). In the case of the left leg, the
stimulation did not have effect, and thus the leg had to be passively
driven. As a consequence, the interaction forces resulted only from
weight and inertia. System’s response was there to decrease the
stiffness of the robotic exoskeleton for HC and CO due to the low
inertia of the leg.
4.4. General discussion
The data presented in this article suggests that the controller of
Kinesis adapted to patient residual function during walking, modulating stimulation and robotic assistance, which was the aim of
the controller design. In our opinion, the AAN capabilities of Kinesis are beyond the control approaches for hybrid walking found in
the literature pertaining to hybrid exoskeletons. Regarding control
of the stimulation, the proposed dual controller allowed to adapt
the stimulation patterns to the functional ability of the patients
while monitoring muscle performance. A recently proposed hybrid controller features an approach similar to the ILC controller
proposed in Kinesis, but was only tested during lifting task with
one SCI patient [32]. The dual stimulation controller of Kinesis
allowed to stimulate both flexor and extensor knee muscles regarding gait phase and the specific functional deficit of the patient. This originated customized stimulation patterns for each leg
of the patients. The patterns varied from no stimulation (patient
1, HP, left leg) to maximum stimulation (patient 3, HC and HP).
Stimulation of knee extensor muscles also adapted to the specific
functional need during stance phases of gait, although stimulation
intensities were low to produce muscular contraction except for
patient 2, where quadriceps muscles were highly stimulated regarding the right leg flexor trend during stance. These results
reveal the importance of closed-loop control of stimulation as
a means to stimulate the muscles from a functional standpoint.
However, closed-loop control of stimulation does not adequately
manage the relationship between stimulation intensity and force
production. As described above, for several experiments the stimulation was unlikely to produce any muscular contraction for normalized stimulation intensity typically under 20%. Moreover, the
opposite case was also noticed in several experiments, where a saturated output of the stimulation controller did not produce muscle
contraction (patient 3, flexor muscles of left leg). Both effects were
derived from controller design, which did not take into account
the non-linear relationship between muscle stimulation and force
production. Incorporating this characteristic in the controller design would provide a criterion for more efficient modulation of the

stimulation amplitude regarding minimum and maximum muscle
activation.
Regarding the exoskeleton control, only the Vanderbilt [33]
and the Hybrid Assistive System [34] exoskeletons were equipped
with compliant joint control. To the author’s knowledge no studies
have been reported on modulation of exoskeleton assistance
during walking for SCI users. The study presented in this article
reveals the interplay between the AAN capabilities of Kinesis and
the voluntary actions of the patient, through the comparative
analysis of the three configurations tested. All three configurations
managed successfully the specific walking impairment for each leg
of the patient, although key differences were noticed among them.
With the CO, the stiffness was modulated after the first step as a
consequence of patient’s leg impairment (patient 1, left leg, patient
2, right leg, patient 3, both legs). These modulations were not
produced until the first learning period with HC, neither with HP.
Further developments will have to address the modulation of the
robotic assistance simultaneously with stimulation modulation,
for example based on impedance control schemes for exoskeleton
control. From direct comparison within HC and HP, no major
differences were observed, neither in the cycle-domain variables
nor in the immediate walking impact.
This similarity is a consequence of the configuration equivalence for the first HC learning period and the HP; during learning,
Kinesis drives the patient’s leg inside a stiff force field, similarly to
HP. On the other hand, the main reason for developing a compliant control of the robotic exoskeleton was to allow the patient to
deviate from the kinematic trajectory and thus reduce exoskeleton
assistance. From comparison of HP with HC and CO, increased interaction forces were expected with the HP, that is, greater NTTI.
That was not the case for the left leg of patient 1, which was fully
functional during walking, comparing HP versus HC and CO. However, it was the case for the left leg of patient 2, in a more impaired condition. Therefore no conclusions can be made about the
effect of the compliant controller of the robotic exoskeleton on the
leg–exoskeleton physical interaction, and further specific studies
are needed. Besides, the overall consistency of the results can be
affected by several factors, such as the uncontrolled effects of trunk
and hip orientation over the interaction forces measured at the leg,
the actual alignment between Kinesis and patient’s leg, and the interaction forces developed at the first step, which determine the
normalization value for the NTTI that is used to assess the muscular performance.
Muscle fatigue estimation has been addressed by off-line
methods, such as the isometric recruitment curve [35]. This
method is performed offline, thus the walking therapy has to be
interrupted for obtaining the fatigue estimation. The online MFE
integrated within Kinesis allowed not only to estimate muscle
performance during walking, but also assess system behavior and
adaptations between the patient and the system. Furthermore,
monitoring the leg-exoskeleton physical interaction is feedback
for modulating the configuration of the hybrid controller. The
application of the muscle fatigue management strategy proposed
in [28] delays muscle fatigue. However, the results obtained
from the experiments presented in this article indicate that the
voluntary leg movements influence the physical interaction, hence
the accuracy of fatigue estimation. There were two mechanisms
that had impact on the physical interaction: (1) the varying force
voluntarily exerted by the patient, which could not be ensured
to be constant throughout the experiment. In this case, patient
slacking would lead to false detection of muscle fatigue. (2) the
normalization of the force–time integral of the interaction forces to
obtain NTTI, where the force–time integral of the interaction forces
developed at the first step is taken to normalize the following
force–time integral forces. In this case, the first step could not
belong to the further stationary steps sequence, and thus misleads

A.J. del-Ama et al. / Robotics and Autonomous Systems 73 (2015) 44–58

the normalization of the force–time integral of the interaction
forces. This could be the case for the right leg of patient 1 in the
CO experiment (Fig. 9(b)), and/or the right leg of patient 2 for the
HC experiment (Fig. 12(b)). Therefore, more robust methods to
uncouple patient contribution to the movement from stimulated
muscle performance and robot contribution to the movement
are needed to better manage muscle fatigue, maximize patient
voluntary contribution, and thus modulate robotic and stimulation
assistance.
Comparing the three configurations tested, it was observed
that the presence of the stimulation increased physical demand
as measured by BP and HR (HC and HP versus CO). Surprisingly,
one study compared the physical demand between hybrid walking
and robotic-only walking, showing that robotic-only walking
demanded higher effort to the patient than hybrid walking [34].
However, that study only reported results from a single case, and
no further discussion of this finding was provided. Interestingly,
the physical demand of hybrid walking observed with Kinesis
was similar to the one reported for passive walking with the
Rewalk [36,37]. This can be attributed to the differences in patient
characteristics. In [36,37], patients were complete thoracic SCI.
Compared with the patients participating in the protocol presented
in this article, the greater effort to perform with the upper limbs
for walking with crutches, and the more impaired cardiovascular
autonomic response as a consequence of the lesion, could explain
the equivalence on the physical demand.
Regarding perceived pain, fatigue and comfort, the stimulation
led to higher scores (HC and HP), although the scores were lower
than 50 mm (half of the scale), indicating patient’s tolerance to
the hybrid walking therapy. The literature pertaining to hybrid exoskeletons reviewed in [14] showed that these important aspects
were not explicitly evaluated. However, different authors claimed
that ‘‘the patients did not report pain’’ [35], or ‘‘improved feeling of safety’’ by the patients [34]. Comparing with the perception of robotic-assisted walking [36,37], the results presented here
are similar for pain, whereas fatigue rated lower. Again, the more
physically impaired patients participating in [36,37] can explain
these differences. On the other hand, subjective opinion regarding Kinesis use was similar to the results reported for Rewalk, although direct comparison can only be made for items 3, 4, 6 and
7 [36]. The lowest scores were obtained for items related to weight,
comfort and adjustability, a drawback shared with current lower
limb wearable robots. Further developments shall optimize the ergonomics of the exoskeleton.
5. Conclusion
Results show that the cooperative controller of Kinesis adapted
to patient functional deficits and voluntary actions during walking,
modulating stimulation and robotic assistance, which was the
aim of the controller design. No noticeable differences were
observed in the comparison between compliant and trajectory
exoskeleton control, which could be caused by the stimulation
effect, synchronizing leg movement to the kinematic pattern.
Further developments must address simultaneous modulation of
stimulation and robot assistance built on explicitly measures of
user actions. This includes more robust methods for monitoring
muscle fatigue.
In any case, results show that the cooperative controller delivered hybrid walking therapy, was tolerated by the patients without adverse effects, along with a tolerable physical demand. This
shows a potential for rehabilitate walking in motor incomplete SCI
patients, guaranteeing further research on this topic. Besides, from
these results further work is envisioned regarding several aspects
of hybrid walking control: stimulation control based on muscle
activation estimate, improved semi-automatic control of walking,
and improved muscle fatigue monitoring.

57

References
[1] W. Staas, C. Formal, M. Freedman, G. Fried, M. Schmidt Read, Spinal Cord Injury
and Spinal Cord Injury Medicine, Lippincott-Raven Publishers, Philadelphia,
NJ, 1998.
[2] D.L. Wolfe, J.T.C. Hsieh, S. Mehta, Rehabilitation Practices and Associated Outcomes Following Spinal Cord Injury, in: J.Eng, l.R. Teasel, W.Miller, D.Wolfe,
A.Townson, J.Hsieh, S.Connolly, S.Mehta, B.Sakakibara (Eds.), Spinal Cord
Injury Rehabilitation Evidence., version 3. Edition, 2010.
URL: www.scireproject.com.
[3] P.L. Ditunno, M. Patrick, M. Stineman, J.F. Ditunno, Who wants to walk?
Preferences for recovery after SCI: A longitudinal and cross-sectional study,
Spinal Cord 46 (7) (2008) 500–506. http://dx.doi.org/10.1038/sj.sc.3102172.
[4] V. Dietz, Body weight supported gait training: From laboratory to clinical
setting, Brain Res. Bull. 76 (5) (2008) 459–463. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.
brainresbull.2008.02.034.
[5] A. Curt, H.J.A. Van Hedel, D. Klaus, V. Dietz, Recovery from a spinal cord injury:
Significance of compensation, neural plasticity, and repair, J. Neurotrauma 25
(6) (2008) 677–685. http://dx.doi.org/10.1089/neu.2007.0468.
[6] J.L. Emken, J.E. Bobrow, D.J. Reinkensmeyer, Robotic movement training as an
optimization problem: designing a controller that assists only as needed, in:
ICORR 2005, 9th International Conference on Rehabilitation Robotics, 2005,
pp. 307–312.
[7] V.R. Edgerton, R.R. Roy, Robotic training and spinal cord plasticity, Brain Res.
Bull. 78 (1) (2009) 4–12. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.brainresbull.2008.09.018.
Robotic.
[8] T. Lam, D. Wolfe, J.J. Eng, A. Domingo, Lower Limb Rehabilitation Following
Spinal Cord Injury, version 4. Edition, in: Spinal Cord Injury Rehabilitation
Evidence, vol. 3, Vancouver, 2010,
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/0003-9993(86)90005-5.
[9] E. Swinnen, S. Duerinck, J.-P.P. Baeyens, R. Meeusen, E. Kerckhofs, Effectiveness of robot-assisted gait training in persons with spinal cord injury: A
systematic review, J. Rehabil. Med. 42 (6) (2010) 520–526. http://dx.doi.org/
10.2340/16501977-0538.
[10] H.J.A. van Hedel, V. Dietz, Rehabilitation of locomotion after spinal cord injury,
Restorative Neurol. Neurosci. 28 (1) (2010) 123–134. http://dx.doi.org/10.
3233/RNN-2010-0508.
[11] B.H. Dobkin, P.W. Duncan, Should body weight-supported treadmill training and robotic-assistive steppers for locomotor training trot back to the
starting gate? Neurorehabilitation and Neural Repair 26 (4) (2012) 308–317.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1177/1545968312439687.
[12] E.C. Field-Fote, K.E. Roach, Influence of a locomotor training approach on
walking speed and distance in people with chronic spinal cord injury: a
randomized clinical trial, Phys. Therapy 91 (1) (2011) 48–60.
[13] N.J. Tester, D.R. Howland, K.V. Day, S.P. Suter, A. Cantrell, A.L. Behrman,
Device use, locomotor training, and the presence of arm swing during treadmill walking post-spinal cord injury, Spinal Cord 49 (3) (2011) 451–456.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1038/sc.2010.128.Device.
[14] A.J. Del-Ama, A.D. Koutsou, J.C. Moreno, A. de los Reyes-Guzmán, A. Gil-Agudo,
J.L. Pons, Review of hybrid exoskeletons to restore gait following spinal cord
injury, J. Rehabil. Res. Dev. 49 (4) (2012) 497–514.
[15] P.H. Peckham, J.S. Knutson, Functional electrical stimulation for neuromuscular applications, Annu. Rev. Biomed. Eng. 7 (1) (2005) 327–360.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1146/annurev.bioeng.6.040803.140103.
[16] D. Prodanov, E. Marani, J. Holsheimer, Functional electric stimulation for
sensory and motor functions: progress and problems, Biomed. Rev. 14 (2003)
23–50.
[17] J. Riess, J.J. Abbas, Adaptative control of cyclic movements as muscles fatigue
using functional electrical stimulation, IEEE Trans. Neural Syst. Rehabil. Eng. 9
(3) (2001) 326–330.
[18] R. Riener, Model-based development of neuroprosthesis for paraplegic patients, Phil. Trans. R. Soc. Lond. 354 (1385) (1999) 877–894. http://dx.doi.org/
10.1098/rstb.1999.0440.
[19] A.H. Vette, K. Masani, J.-Y. Kim, M.R. Popovic, Closed-loop control of functional electrical stimulation-assisted arm-free standing in individuals with
spinal cord injury: a feasibility study, Neuromodulation 12 (1) (2009) 22–32.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1111/j.1525-1403.2009.00184.x.
[20] A.S. Gorgey, C.D. Black, C.P. Elder, G.A. Dudley, Effects of electrical stimulation
parameters on fatigue in skeletal muscle, J. Orthop. Sports Phys. Ther. 39 (9)
(2009) 684–692. http://dx.doi.org/10.2519/jospt.2009.3045.
[21] H.M. Franken, P.H. Franken, M. Fidder, H.B.K. Boom, Fatigue of intermittently
stimulated paralyzed quadriceps during imposed cyclical lower leg movements, J. Electromyogr. Kinesiol. 3 (1) (1993) 3–12.
[22] A.J. Del-Ama, A. Gil-agudo, J.L. Pons, J.C. Moreno, H. Fes-robot, Hybrid FESRobot cooperative control of ambulatory gait rehabilitation exoskeleton,
J. Neuroeng. Rehabil. (2014) 11–27.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1186/1743-0003-11-27.
[23] A.J. Del-Ama, J.C. Moreno, A. Gil-agudo, J.L. Pons, Hybrid FES-robot cooperative
control of ambulatory gait rehabilitation exoskeleton for spinal cord injured
users, in: J.L. Pons, D. Torricelli, M. Pajaro (Eds.), 2012 International Conference
on Neurorehabilitation (ICNR2012): Converging Clinical and Engineering
Research on Neurorehabilitation, Springer Heidelberg New York, Toledo
(Spain), 2012, pp. 155–159.

58

A.J. del-Ama et al. / Robotics and Autonomous Systems 73 (2015) 44–58

[24] A. Esclarín, Lesion medular. Un enfoque multidisciplinario, Editorial Médica
Panamericana, 2010.
[25] J. Moreno, F. Brunetti, E. Rocon, J. Pons, Immediate effects of a controllable
knee ankle foot orthosis for functional compensation of gait in patients
with proximal leg weakness, Med. Biol. Eng. Comput. 46 (1) (2008) 43–53.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/s11517-007-0267-x.
[26] J.M.B. Bertomeu, J.M.B. Lois, R.B. Guillem, A.P.D. Pozo, J. Lacuesta, C.G.
Mollà, P.V. Luna, J.P. Pastor, Development of a hinge compatible with the
kinematics of the knee joint, Prosthet. Orthot. Int. 31 (4) (2007) 371–383.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/03093640601095842,
URL: http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/18050008.
[27] A.J. Del-Ama, E. Bravo-esteban, J.C. Moreno, J. Gómez-soriano, A.D. Koutsou,
A. Gil-agudo, J.L. Pons, Knee muscle fatigue estimation during isometric
artificially elicited contractions in incomplete spinal cord injured subjects,
in: J.L. Pons, D. Torricelli, M. Pajaro (Eds.), 2012 International Conference
on Neurorehabilitation (ICNR2012): Converging Clinical and Engineering
Research on Neurorehabilitation, Springer Heidelberg New York, Toledo
(Spain), 2012, pp. 329–333.
[28] A.J. Del-Ama, A.D. Koutsou, E. Bravo-Esteban, J. Gómez-Soriano, A. Gil-agudo,
J.L. Pons, J.C. Moreno, A comparison of customized strategies to manage muscle fatigue in isometric artificially elicited muscle contractions for incomplete
SCI subjects, J. Autom. Control 21 (1) (2013) 19–25. http://dx.doi.org/10.2298/
JAC1301019A.
[29] J. DeVine, D. Norvell, E. Ecker, D. Fourney, Evaluating the correlation and
responsiveness of patient-reported pain with function and quality-of-life
outcomes after spine surgery, Spine 36 (21) (2011) S69–S74. http://dx.doi.
org/10.1097/BRS.0b013e31822ef6de.
[30] L. Demers, M. Monette, Y. Lapierre, D.L. Arnold, C. Wolfson, Reliability, validity,
and applicability of the Quebec User Evaluation of Satisfaction with assistive
Technology (QUEST 2.0) for adults with multiple sclerosis, Disabil. Rehabil.
Assist. Technol. 15 (24) (2002) 21–30.
[31] F.M. Maynard Jr., M.B. Bracken, G. Creasey, J.F. Ditunno Jr., W.H. Donovan, T.B.
Ducker, S.L. Garber, R.J. Marino, S.L. Stover, C.H. Tator, Others, International
standards for neurological and functional classification of spinal cord injury.
American Spinal Injury Association., Spinal Cord 35 (5) (1997) 266–274.
[32] H.A. Quintero, R.J. Farris, K. Ha, M. Goldfarb, Preliminary assessment of
the efficacy of supplementing knee extension capability in a lower limb
exoskeleton with FES, in: 34th Annual International Conference of the IEEE
Engineering in Medicine and Biology Society., Vol. 2012, 2012, pp. 3360–3363.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/EMBC.2012.6346685.
[33] R.J. Farris, H.a. Quintero, M. Goldfarb, Preliminary evaluation of a powered
lower limb orthosis to aid walking in paraplegic individuals, IEEE Trans.
Neural Syst. Rehabil. Eng. 19 (6) (2011) 652–659. http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/
TNSRE.2011.2163083.
[34] D. Popovic, R. Tomovic, L. Schwirtlich, Hybrid assistive system-the motor
neuroprosthesis, IEEE Trans. Biomed. Eng. 36 (7) (1989) 729–737.
[35] M. Goldfarb, K. Korkowski, B. Harrold, W. Durfee, Preliminary evaluation of a
controlled-brake orthosis for FES-aided gait, IEEE Trans. Neural Syst. Rehabil.
Eng. 11 (3) (2003) 241–248. http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/TNSRE.2003.816873.
[36] G. Zeilig, H. Weingarden, M. Zwecker, I. Dudkiewicz, A. Bloch, A. Esquenazi,
Safety and tolerance of the ReWalk exoskeleton suit for ambulation by people
with complete spinal cord injury: a pilot study, J. Spinal Cord Med. 35 (2)
(2012) 96–101. http://dx.doi.org/10.1179/2045772312Y.0000000003.
[37] A. Esquenazi, M. Talaty, A. Packel, M. Saulino, The Rewalk powered exoskeleton to restore ambulatory function to individuals with thoracic-level
motor-complete spinal cord injury, Amer. J. Phys. Med. Rehabil. 91 (11) (2012)
911–921. http://dx.doi.org/10.1097/PHM.0b013e318269d9a3.

Antonio J. del-Ama is with the Biomechanics and Technical Aids Department in National Hospital for Spinal Cord
Injury (Toledo, Spain) since 2006. His early works were
biomechanic modeling of manual wheelchair propulsion, evaluation of pressure-relief cushions and design
of assessment procedures for functional evaluation of
wheelchair performance. Since 2008 he was involved in
several National and European research projects related
to development and evaluation of lower limb wearable
robots for rehabilitation in combination with neuroprostheses. He is currently involved in several projects related
to this field (EU Biomot and HYPER). His current research interests are the design
and evaluation of rehabilitation robots and neuroprosthesis.

Ángel Gil-Agudo is a Medical Doctor and Ph.D with a
doctoral thesis about manual wheelchair propulsion ergonomics in spinal cord injury patients (2009). He has
clinical practice in different hospitals since 1993 as Physical Medicine and Rehabilitation specialist. He was a researcher from 1994 to 1996 in Institute of Biomechanics in
Valencia (IBV). Currently he is a coordinator of Biomechanics and Technical Aids Department in National Hospital for
Spinal Cord Injury (Toledo, Spain) since 2005. Current research focuses on the application of biomechanics to the
development of systems based on virtual reality for upper
limb rehabilitation treatment and the development of neuro-robotic and neuroprosthetics to compensate or restore movement disorders.
Elisabeth Bravo-Esteban is a Physiotherapist from CastillaLa Mancha University and holds an MSc in treatment of
pain from the University Rey Juan Carlos I. She is currently
involved in the Ph.D. program at the University of Castilla
la Mancha. From 2008 she is with the Sensorimotor Function Group at the National Hospital for Spinal Cord Injury
(Toledo, Spain). She has gathered experience in clinical research and several neuropsychological techniques for the
assessment of patients with spinal cord injury: evoked
motor potentials from trans-cranial magnetic stimulation,
skin reflexes, H-reflex, dynamometry, electromyography.
Her current research interests are spinal cord injury rehabilitation, focused on spasticity and neurorehabilitation.
Soraya Pérez-Nombela is a physical therapist and predoctoral researcher at the Biomechanics and Technical
Aids Department in National Hospital for Spinal Cord
Injury (Toledo, Spain). Her current work is related to
biomechanical gait analysis of spinal cord injury patients,
and the functional evaluation of assistive technology
for walking. She is also involved in several research
projects related to neuroprosthetic and robotic devices for
rehabilitation. Her current research interests also include
the muscle synergies approach for assessment of gait.
José L. Pons is with CSIC since 1993 and has actively participated in a number of National, European and International
RTD projects in the area of rehabilitation robotics, new actuators and control technologies. In particular, he was a coordinator of EU GAIT, EU MANUS and EU ESBiRRo projects.
In addition he is currently coordinating several national
scope and European projects, e.g. EU NeuroTREMOR, EU
Biomot and HYPER. His research interests span the development and application of novel technologies in the field
of neurorehabilitation of motor conditions of neurological
origin, and in particular Rehabilitation Robotics and Neuroprosthetics founded on the understanding of neurophysiological mechanisms underlying motor control in humans.
Juan C. Moreno gained his academic title at the La Salle
University of Bogotá, Colombia, in 2001. He received
the Ph.D. degree in Industrial Engineering from the
School of Industrial Engineering (ETSII) of the Technical
University of Madrid (UPM), Spain, in 2006. In 2001, he
joined the Spanish National Research Council (CSIC) as
technical assistant and junior researcher in the Industrial
Automation Institute. After obtaining his Ph.D., he cofounded CSIC’s start-up company Technaid, where he
held a position as Postdoctoral researcher, continuing his
research line activities in the framework of European
projects. In 2008, he assumed the current position at the Bioengineering Group
(GBIO) of CSIC, as leader of projects in Gait Neurorehabilitation. His main research
interests include signal processing, pattern recognition, electromechanical design
problems in biomedical engineering, system modeling and identification, functional
electrical stimulation (neuroprosthetics), rehabilitation robotics and specially its
optimization for the neurological rehabilitation after stroke and spinal cord injury,
unobtrusive motion capture, analysis and synthesis of neural control of human
walking and biomechanical simulations.

