Robotics and Autonomous Systems 73 (2015) 144–154

Contents lists available at ScienceDirect

Robotics and Autonomous Systems
journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/robot

Lag–lead based assessment and adaptation of exercise speed for
stroke survivors
Angelo Basteris a,∗ , Sharon M. Nijenhuis b , Jaap H. Buurke b,c , Gerdienke B. Prange b,d ,
Farshid Amirabdollahian a
a

Adaptive Systems Research Group, University of Hertfordshire, College Lane, AL95HX Hatfield, United Kingdom

b

Roessingh Research and Development, Roessinghsbleekweg 33b, 7522 AH Enschede, The Netherlands

c

Department of Biomedical Signals and Systems, University of Twente, Drienerlolaan 5, 7522 NB Enschede, The Netherlands

d

Department of Biomechanical Engineering, University of Twente, Drienerlolaan 5, 7522 NB Enschede, The Netherlands

highlights
•
•
•
•
•

Our system enabled people with stroke to exercise at home by playing videogames.
Movement speed was adapted to performance, based on the Optimal Challenge Framework.
The mechanism of adaptation has been effective in 195 of 248 (78.6%) sessions.
The efficacy of the adaptation mechanism led subjects to train more intensively.
Lag–lead based adaptation is a suitable auto-tuning tool for robot therapy.

article

info

Article history:
Available online 8 September 2014
Keywords:
Rehabilitation robotics
Stroke
Difficulty
Exercise
Engagement
Exergames
Wrist
Hand

abstract
The SCRIPT project aims at delivering machine-mediated hand and wrist exercises to people with stroke in
their homes. In this context, adapting the exercise to the individual needs potentially enhances recovery.
We designed a system composed of a passive-actuated wearable device, a personal computer and an
arm support. The system enables users to exercise their hand and wrist movements by playing interactive
games which were developed as part of the project. Movements and their required speed are tailored on
the individual’s capabilities. During the exercise the system assesses whether the subject is in advance
(leading) or in delay (lagging) with respect to a reference trajectory. This information provides input to an
adaptive mechanism which changes the required movement speed in order to make the exercise neither
too easy nor too challenging.
In this paper, we show results of the adaptation process in a study involving seven persons with
chronic stroke who completed a six weeks training in their homes. Based on the patterns observed
in difficulty and lag–lead score, we defined five session types (challenging, challenging–then supporting,
supporting, under-supporting and under-challenging). We show that the mechanism of adaptation has been
effective in 195 of 248 (78.6%) sessions.
Based on our results, we propose the lag–lead based assessment and adaptation as an auto-tuning
tool for machine based exercise, with particular focus on rehabilitation robotics. Also, the classification
of sessions among different types can be applied to other studies in order to better understanding the
progression of therapy in order to maximize its outcome.
© 2014 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

1. Introduction

∗

Corresponding author. Tel.: +44 1707284630.
E-mail addresses: angelobasteris@gmail.com (A. Basteris), s.nijenhuis@rrd.nl
(S.M. Nijenhuis), j.buurke@rrd.nl (J.H. Buurke), g.prange@rrd.nl (G.B. Prange),
f.amirabdollahian2@herts.ac.uk (F. Amirabdollahian).
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.robot.2014.08.013
0921-8890/© 2014 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

Due to an ageing society, the number of people suffering a
stroke is expected to increase, leading to increased demands for
healthcare, while the availability of healthcare professionals is decreasing [1]. Overall, this will have a strong impact on healthcare services and related costs. Therefore, new ways of providing

A. Basteris et al. / Robotics and Autonomous Systems 73 (2015) 144–154

healthcare services, such as remotely supervised intensive treatment and self-administered exercises (e.g. in the patient’s home),
address a major issue for future healthcare organization [2].
1.1. Rehabilitation robotics for stroke
Functional recovery from stroke demands a long period of physical rehabilitation. Research into motor relearning and cortical reorganization after stroke has provided a neurophysiological basis
for restoration of arm function: high training intensity, active participation and execution of movements, feedback and application
of functional exercises are key aspects [3,4]. Technological innovations as those introduced in the gaming industry (e.g. Nintendo
Wii, Microsoft Kinect) provided an opportunity to design interventions that combine many of such aspects. Several of such devices
can be integrated within one system for home-based rehabilitation [5]. In addition to motion tracking systems, robotic devices can
provide a support towards the completion of a motor task, thereby
allowing physically assisted practice when this is not possible otherwise. This facilitates intensive training, while the patient is actively contributing to the movement. Robotic systems have an
additional advantage in that they potentially allow independent/
self-administered training. Once set-up, a therapist can supervise
several patients at the same time. This enables the patient to train
frequently without a therapist’s presence, in his/her own home
environment while remotely supervised by a therapist, off-line. If
training time is not limited by therapist availability, this may potentially enable a higher dosage of training, which may stimulate
gains in arm/hand function [6]. The remote supervision of the therapist can also be considered as a mean to target the therapy so
that best outcomes are possible, while also ensuring patient safety
(e.g. preventing over-exercising.
With a robotic device, haptic guidance can be used to stimulate
motor relearning. Different types of haptic guidance have been
implemented in robotic devices, ranging from passive guidance
(no active contribution of the patient needed to soft or hard
guidance, guiding a patient along a pre-defined trajectory where
deviations are resisted to a larger or smaller extent [7,8]. There is
evidence that guidance modalities which do not restrict movement
errors and require the largest effort active movement without
interference from the robot or error augmentation lead to larger
and faster adaptation during reaching movements [9].
Therapy with robotic device has proven effectiveness for recovery of the motor functions of the hemiparetic arm, but the transfer
of these effects to activities of daily living is less pronounced [10].
The main focus of robot-aided therapy has been on the proximal arm, resulting in limited recovery of wrist and hand functions
[11–13]. Without additional involvement of the distal arm in exercises, the functional nature of the training is not optimally employed. Moreover, the wrist and hand play a major role in a
person’s functional independence. In order to maximize independent use of the upper extremity in daily life, it is important to involve functional practice of the wrist and hand in an intensive way
in treatment [14].
1.2. The SCRIPT project1
To accommodate treatment incorporating the abovementioned
key aspects for motor relearning, the SCRIPT (Supervised Care
and Rehabilitation Involving Personal Telerobotics) project aims to
apply robot-aided therapy focusing on hand and wrist exercises

1 Videos demonstrating the SCRIPT system are available on the project Youtube
channel http://goo.gl/fpaZUD.

145

at home. This would enable self-administration of more intense
and more frequent exercises compared to conventional therapy
in a clinical setting, which is often limited by the availability of
therapists. An important issue that has specific attention within
this SCRIPT project is related to whether patients actually improve
their amount of practice when provided with the opportunity of
self-administered training at home. These aspects are combined in
the first prototype system (SCRIPT1), which is based on a passiveactuated orthosis which provides an off-set force towards extension of fingers and wrist using elastic cords and leaf springs [15].
It is noteworthy that, in the domain of rehabilitation robotics, this
device is classifiable as a passive dynamics machine, rather than
a robot. It features sensors for measuring joint angles at the wrist
and fingers and an inertial measurement unit to detect gross movements of the hand. These data are fused and used to control interactive games that require hand opening/closing and/or wrist
movements. These are installed on a dedicated personal computer,
installed at a patient’s home for independent training with off-line
remote supervision by a healthcare professional [16]. We deliberately chose of having only off-line supervision so that subjects
could exercise any time they wanted, without having to plan their
activity or having to rely on the availability of therapists. However, a patient’s exercise plan was programmed by the therapist.
The complexity and level of challenge were based on a predefined
exercise scheme, and more difficult exercises were presented to
patients as they got better in their scheduled tasks.
1.3. The need for adaptive exercises
Besides optimization of the treatment intensity, active contribution of a person to such treatment should be emphasized
as well. Self-initiated and self-generated activity stimulates brain
plasticity underlying functional reorganization of the cortex after
a stroke [17]. The importance of self-generated activity was emphasized in a study on healthy subjects, where training of voluntary induced wrist movements resulted in larger increase in performance and cortical reorganization compared to passively induced movements [18]. Along the same lines, repeatedly completing reaching movements of stroke patients by a robotic device
when they could not reach the target (with the patient being passive) was inferior to making active reaching movements without
robotic assistance [19].
An adaptive training environment can optimally encourage active contribution of the patients, based on their abilities and needs.
It is increasingly recognized that patients respond differently to a
certain treatment for the upper extremity, e.g. in the field of robotaided therapy [8]. The current challenge is to understand how to
customize arm training programmes to each patient’s needs and
abilities.
Stimulating improvement of arm/hand function via optimal engagement and active contribution requires that the exercises are
challenging; neither too difficult nor too easy, at all times. According to the Challenge Point framework, this is expected to improve
motor learning and neuromotor recovery [20]. This implies that,
ideally, the training environment adapts to the performance of the
patient. This must also take into account that the stroke population is highly heterogeneous in terms of limitations caused by
the stroke and the time course of functional improvement. Given
the element of relearning involved in rehabilitation, we used taxonomies from the learning theory towards setting the challenge
level to maximize adherence to therapy. In the domain of learning
and education, balancing between supporting and challenging allows the trainee to achieve optimal learning [21], as shown in Fig. 1.
When applying support from technology to the upper extremity in order to improve arm/hand function, according to the
abovementioned considerations it is important to promote active

146

A. Basteris et al. / Robotics and Autonomous Systems 73 (2015) 144–154

Fig. 1. Sanford’s theory of challenge and support: balance between support and
challenge promotes a student’s growth and personal development.

movement, allow errors and variability, and continuously adapt
the amount of support to the varying performance of movements.
In robotic gait training, these issues have been incorporated into an
‘assist-as-needed’ guidance algorithm that optimizes movement
error and robotic support, including a forgetting factor to reduce
the robotic support when error is small, while at the same time
allowing the variability of movements that are natural to human
movement [22].
1.4. Adaptive exercises
Besides providing assist-as-needed support by a device, tailoring exercise to the individual’s performance can be done by considering a wide variety of inputs and outputs. The simplest step in this
sense is to evaluate subject’s active range of motion (ROM) prior to
each session and scale the training environment accordingly. Typically such scaling is maintained constant during the session, also
for safety reasons.
Another possibility is to evaluate a subject’s motor improvement for a session, based on a statistical model, and increase the
exercise difficulty if the subject has overcome a predefined target [23]. Again, this mechanism operates at a session level, and in
this case it also requires the final decision of a healthcare professional prior to changes to the exercise difficulty.
When considering an online adaptation instead, a possibility is
to adapt the robot dynamics based on subjects’ performance [24].
An alternative output for the online adaptation process is the exercise difficulty. A computation mechanism based on Fitts’ Law
has been validated on reaching movements in a single study session [25]. In this case, the system switched among three levels of
difficulty. The task difficulty and the related cognitive workload
can also be adjusted by combining performance data with psychophysiological measurements [26].
Regarding wrist movements, an adaptive procedure based on
the number of successful (i.e. those with limited contribution by
the robot) movements was used to introduce an offset in terms of
joint angle by shifting from a pathologic posture towards a natural
posture [27].
1.5. Lag–lead based mechanism of adaptation
The SCRIPT1 system assessed the active ROM and movement
duration during a calibration phase prior to each session, and then
adapted the task difficulty by altering the exercise speed online

within a training session [28]. The system could assess whether
the subject was in advance (leading) or in delay (lagging) with respect to a desired trajectory for each articulation, i.e. hand flexion
or wrist extension. Using the lagging or leading status, a score was
calculated that provided input to an adaptive mechanism aimed at
making the exercise sufficiently challenging. We previously tested
this approach on healthy subjects by regulating the movement
time, based on a lag–lead indicator, in a reaching task [29]. That
study provided first evidence for feasibility. In current study, we
tested the feasibility of our approach to adapt a training environment to varying performance across stroke subjects. If successful, this would present a way to provide independent training for
stroke subjects at a proper challenge level within each training session, motivating them to practise more.
With this work we investigated the feasibility and effect of
the lag–lead approach for adaptation of the exercise environment
to personal performance. We considered that by observing the
progression of task difficulty within a training session it is possible
to determine whether the subject was challenged or supported by
the system. Hence, we defined types of sessions based on patterns
in the adaptation behaviour, and verified whether our approach
effectively challenged and motivated subjects without making the
exercise neither too easy nor too difficult.
2. Methods
2.1. Experimental setup
The SCRIPT system is a machine designed for home based
rehabilitation. It consists of several components, as shown in Fig. 2.
A wearable device is used to assist the wrist and hand during
training [15]. The device is a passive-actuated orthosis composed
mainly of a forearm shell, a plate which fits on the back of the
hand, and finger caps. These components, linked by mechanical
parts, interact physically with the user by providing forces to
the wrist and hand through use of elastic cords and leaf springs.
Such elastic cords are pulling wrist and fingers towards extension,
which is impaired by stroke, and resist to the involuntary fingers
and wrist flexion, which are consequence of stroke. The choice
of a passive actuation makes the device inherently safe, a feature
particularly desirable in the context of home-based rehabilitation
(i.e. when no therapists or technician would be available to assist
in case of failure). The orthosis is equipped with resistive sensors
(Flex Sensor 2.2’’, SpectraSymbol, Salt Lake City, USA) to measure
flexion of the fingers, a potentiometer to measure the wrist angle
and a 6-axis accelerometer (UM6LT, CH Robotics, Payson, USA).
The major limitation of resistive sensors is their time-varying
response, with transients which can take some hundredths of
seconds, which limited the identification of grasped objects to only
four different sizes [15]. The data from these sensors are acquired
via an Arduino 2560 microcontroller. This is connected via USB port
to a Windows based personal computer which contains all customdeveloped software components needed to complete a training
session, including data acquisition and processing, a patient user
interface and interactive games. Data was sampled at 60 Hz. Five
resistive sensors measured the flexion of each finger. This data was
applied as input to a 22DOF kinematic model of the hand which
also estimated the 3D position of the fingertips. We considered
that when the hand was fully open the fingertips were more sparse
than when the hand was closed. We hence measured the hand
opening as the standard deviation of the positions of the five finger
tips at each sample. The wrist angle was measured in a range of
approximately 45 degrees of extension to 90 degrees of flexion by
a potentiometer, with a resolution of 1 degree. For each session,
these signals were normalized with respect to the maximum and
minimum measured values during a preliminary calibration phase.

A. Basteris et al. / Robotics and Autonomous Systems 73 (2015) 144–154

147

thus varying in the range [0, 1]. The worst case, 0 means that
the subject was in systematic delay with respect to the reference
(lagging). Because of the greater or equal than sign in (3), the best
score, 1, was given when one was in perfect sync with the reference
trajectory or eventually anticipating (leading).
2.3. Adaptive behaviour of the system

Fig. 2. The SCRIPT1 system—composed of passive-actuated device (1), touchscreen
display (2), personal computer (3) and arm support (4).

An arm support (SaeboMAS, Saebo Inc, Charlotte NC, USA)
provided gravity compensation of the proximal arm. A dedicated
telesupervision platform, developed as part of the project, enabled
the healthcare professional to remotely monitor the progress of the
therapy by accessing a secure dedicated web user interface.
2.2. Lag–lead based assessment of performance
In order to achieve the adaptive behaviour of the game, it was
needed to assess subject’s movement on the fly (i.e. as practice
progressed). During the exercise, the target onset triggered the
acquisition of the movement excursion signal, either hand opening
or wrist angle. The acquisition finished when the current target
passed the cursor. Then, the movement profile was considered only
within the interval corresponding to a minimum and maximum
value, respectively m and M. The time interval between these
two points was considered as movement duration, T , and NQ is
the number of samples within this time frame. We considered
and computed a score only for movements lasting more than
0.5 s—in order to ensure that these reflected subjects’ intentional
movement. We set this condition after preliminary testing which
showed artefacts due to subject not reacting to a target, resulting
in very short movements (with minima and maxima very close
to each other). For computing the lag–lead score LL, the system
generated a reference trajectory xR , of the same size matching NQ .
For the time profile of finger movement (hand opening), we used
a model validated for healthy subjects and stroke survivors [30]:



xR (t ) = m + M − c1 + c2 · tanh

t − c3 · T

(1)

c4 · T

where c1 = (m + M )/2, c2 = (M − m)/2, c3 = T /2 and c4 = T /6,
while for the wrist excursion we used a minimum jerk profile [31,
20]:

xR (t ) = m + (M − m) · 6 ·


+ 10 ·

t

T

.

t

T

t

T
(2)

Each sample xN was then compared with the corresponding sample
of the reference trajectory xRN , and the lag–lead score LL was
defined as the fraction of samples in which the signal was higher
(for an increasing signal) or lower (for a decreasing one) than the
reference trajectory:
NQ


LL =

(xN ≥ xRN )

N =1

NQ

,

2.4. Classification of session type based on pattern of adaptation
Based on the observed patterns in exercise difficulty and
lag–lead score LL, we defined five types of sessions, namely challenging, challenging–then supporting, supporting, under-challenging
and under-supporting (summarized in Table 1). The former three
are those in which the adaptation mechanism was effective in
holding LL within the target region. Ideally, this happened with a
progressive increase in speed (challenging session). If such increase
was followed by a decrease in speed prior to session’s end, the session was classified as challenging–then supporting. In a supporting
session, the success was achieved by progressively decreasing the
speed of the exercise. The adaptation mechanism could eventually fail and lead to sessions with LL respectively higher (underchallenging) or lower (under-supporting) than the target region.
Consider each training session as including NMOV movement repetitions. This results in having two arrays of size NMOV , which contain respectively the difficulty scaling factor λ and the value of LL
for each movement repetition. The abovementioned classification
relies on imposing the conditions specified in Table 1 over these
two vectors, where LL is the average value within a session.
2.5. Subjects

 4
− 15 ·

The lag–lead score LL was used to adapt the exercise, in order
to make it easier for subjects who were often in delay with respect
to the reference trajectory (failure), and harder for those able to
anticipate it (success).
This was achieved by multiplying the speed of the game by a
factor λ which was the outcome of an adaptive process. Let th+
and th− be the thresholds for LL which determined success and
failure, respectively. If amongst the last N trials there was a number
of successes (or failures) higher than N + (or N −), the current value
of the multiplier factor λ was divided (or multiplied) by 0.9.
In our case, λ started at 1 and we used N = 20, N + = N − =
10, th+ = 0.8 and th− = 0.4. This implied that a subject was
considered failing when lagging for 40% of the time within one
movement repetition (LL < 0.4), and successful when leading for
at least 80% of the time (LL > 0.8). If a subject was failing in at least
10 of the last 20 movement repetitions (more than 10 of the 20
trials), the game speed was multiplied by 0.9 providing more time
to perform in the next execution, while it was divided by 0.9 if one
was leading in 10 or more of the last 20 trials.

(3)

Data of seven chronic stroke patients were used in this study.
These subjects are a subset (the first seven who completed the
training cycle) participating in an ongoing clinical evaluation [32].
Their demographic characteristics and results about training duration are shown in Table 2. The study protocol was approved
by local medical ethics committees in two sites (Enschede, the
Netherlands—patient code nl and Rome, Italy—patient code it) and
all participants provided informed consent. For participation in the
study, subjects had to meet the following inclusion criteria: (1) between 6 months and 5 years after stroke; (2) age between 18 and
80 years; (3) clinically diagnosed with partial central paresis of the
arm and hand because of a stroke, but with 15° active elbow flexion
and a quarter range of active finger flexion; (4) living at home and
having Internet access; (5) having a carer who is a co-resident or

148

A. Basteris et al. / Robotics and Autonomous Systems 73 (2015) 144–154
Table 1
Definition and conditions specifying five adaptation types—categories (shaded) represent effective adaptation.

Table 2
Characteristics of the subjects in this study.
Subject ID

Sex

Age (years)

Time post stroke (months)

FM score at inclusion

ARAT score at inclusion

nl01
nl02
nl03
nl04
nl05
it02
it04

M
M
M
M
F
M
F

34
52
43
58
61
62
66

11
10.5
26
10.5
10
8
11

56
17
11
44
9
16
46

47
5
4
31
3
3
54

Abbreviations: FM score = Fugl-Meyer test score; ARAT score = Action Research Arm Test score.

closely involved in their care; (6) able to understand and follow instructions; (7) no additional orthopaedic, neurological, or rheumatologic disease of the upper extremity; and (8) no severe neglect or
uncorrected visual impairments.
2.6. Experimental protocol
Subjects received six weeks of arm and hand training at home
using the SCRIPT system. Trained healthcare professionals (HCP)
installed the system in the first training week in the subjects’
homes, and instructed them how to operate it towards performing
daily exercises mediated via interactive games. From the games
made available by the therapist, subjects could choose which
game to perform. There were three different games, some of
which featured several variants based on the number and type of
movements required. The seashell game required subjects to open
and close their hand in a grasp to operate a seashell on the screen to
catch fishes swimming towards it. The crocco game was available
in four variants. In all of these, the subjects moved a crocodile on
the screen. In the simplest case, subjects were required to flex and
extend their wrist to avoid obstacles. In the second case, lateral
movements of the arm were added, in order to move the crocodile
laterally on the screen. The third category required instead the
grasping movement to let the crocodile eat some fruits, whereas
the fourth category included all these movements. Finally, the
labyrinth game, where subjects moved a cursor through a labyrinth,
was available in three variants. In the simplest case, subjects
could move the cursor upwards–downwards by anteroposterior
movements of the hand, and leftwards–rightwards by flexion or
extension of the wrist. In the second variant, movements of hand
pronation–supination were required to open doors. Finally, in the
last variant subjects had to grasp a key by a grasping gesture before
opening the door.

All subjects trained independently, and were remotely supervised, off-line, by a HCP. Subjects were recommended to train
180 min per week (equalling a schedule of 6 days per week, 30 min
per day), but they were free to choose their own preferred training
duration, and were allowed to practise whenever desired. These
choices, although not ideal from the researchers’ point of view because of the high variability introduced in the study, has been done
in order to improve patients’ motivation and adherence and let
them be in control of the therapy.
During the first training week, the HCP contacted each subject
three times, in order to ensure competence with the SCRIPT
system. During the other training weeks, the HCP visited each
subject once per week to check on the subject’s performance.
2.7. Data analysis
In order to evaluate the performance of the lag–lead based
assessment and adaptation, we considered for each session the
array of lag–lead scores and the corresponding array of game
difficulty (scaling factors λ). These values were computed on-thefly during subjects’ exercise. For each session, we considered as
indicators of the amount of usage, the time spent playing and the
number of movement repetitions.
The primary indicator of the performance for the adaptation
mechanism was the percentage of sessions in which this was
effective (types challenging, challenging–then supporting and supporting). We considered its overall efficacy, differences between
movements and subjects.
We hypothesized that the success of the adaptation effectively
motivated subjects to train more. Hence, we tested whether the
duration of a session (measured either by number of repetitions
or session duration) was higher in sessions where the adaptation
was effective. We tested our hypotheses with a one-way ANOVA

A. Basteris et al. / Robotics and Autonomous Systems 73 (2015) 144–154

149

Fig. 3. Time progression of score and difficulty (game speed) for sessions of different categories: (a) challenging, (b) challenging–then supporting, (c) supporting, (d) underchallenging, (e) under-supporting. Solid line for score represents filtered signal (moving average, N = 5, used only for visualization), dashed line represents raw values. The
green area represents the interval defined as successful by setting the regulator parameters th+ = 0.8 and th− = 0.4. (For interpretation of the references to colour in this
figure legend, the reader is referred to the web version of this article.)

(factor: session type) and contrast analysis separately for hand
and wrist movements, using SPSS version 21 (IBM). We considered
p-values below 0.05 as statistically significant.

duration, the number of game instances for which the adaptation
process has been analysed and the partitioning among hand and
wrist movements for each subject.

3. Results

3.2. Game difficulty and evolution of score in different types of
sessions

3.1. Amount of exercise
Overall, subjects performed a total of 248 training sessions
(35 ± 11 sessions per subject). This led to a gross total of 63 h of
practice (9 ± 4 h per subject). Table 3 shows the overall exercise

Fig. 3 shows examples of the five types of sessions for several
subjects, including both hand and wrist movements. Each of these
figures shows time progression of score and game speed. Fig. 3(a)
shows a challenging session in which subject nl03 performed 165

150

A. Basteris et al. / Robotics and Autonomous Systems 73 (2015) 144–154
Table 3
Amount of exercise, sessions and partitioning among wrist and hand movements.
Subject ID

Total exercise duration [h]

Sessions [#]

Average session duration [min]

Hand movements [#]

extbfWrist movements [#]

nl01
nl02
nl03
nl04
nl05
it02
it04

4.14
13.03
9.91
9.36
2.87
10.65
12.88

40
30
58
25
39
30
26

6.2
26.1
10.3
22.5
4.4
21.3
29.7

2525
1871
1975
1003
350
7645
1028

574
1130
5621
783
4177
99
1137

challenging (94), supporting (10) and challenging–then supporting
(1) sessions. Failures resulted exclusively in under-challenging
(18 sessions). Also, no episodes of under-supporting adaptation
(i.e., subjects scoring consistently below the target score) have
occurred.
The number of sessions including exercise of hand movements
was similar (125). In this case, the adaptation was effective in 90
sessions. These include challenging (67), supporting (12) and challenging–then supporting (11) sessions. Overall, the success rate resulted lower in comparison with the wrist movements (72%). In
this case, failures consisted mainly in under-supportive sessions
(34), while we observed only one under-challenging session.
Fig. 5(a) shows the number of sessions for each of the five
categories, for each subject, for wrist movements. It is noteworthy
that under-challenging sessions happened for three out of seven
subjects (nl01, nl04 and it04). Fig. 5(b) shows the session types
for hand movement. In this case, the under-supporting sessions
involved five subjects, including the same subjects who produced
under-challenging sessions for the wrist (nl01, nl04 and it04).
Fig. 4. Partitioning among the different session types with respect to the challenge
and support theory. The numbers represent the frequency of each type.

movements of wrist flexion, and the game speed progressively
increased to about twice (2.05) the initial value. This happened
in about 25 min. Fig. 3(b) shows a challenging–then supporting
session performed by subject it02. In this case, the difficulty did
not exclusively increase (since after about 2, 10 and 17 min it
was decreased by the adaptation rules). However, there was an
overall increase up to 2.6 times the initial speed, after 22 min.
After that, the speed was then decreased until 2.05 times the initial
value. Then the subject decided to stop after 25 min of exercise.
Fig. 3(c) shows a supporting session performed by nl02. In this case,
during 5 min of practice the difficulty was reduced to 0.81 times
the initial value and the observed average lag–lead score was 0.46,
thus within the target region. Fig. 3(d) shows an under-challenging
session performed by nl04. In this case, the difficulty progressively
increased to 1.37 times the initial value. This value was still too
low, provided that the average score for 5 min of the session (0.89)
remained above the target value. Finally, Fig. 3(e) shows an undersupporting session performed by nl01. In this case, despite the fact
that the difficulty decreased to 0.65 times the initial value within
15 min of duration, the average score (0.2) was below the target
value.

3.4. Effect of adaptation on training duration
We hypothesized that the successful adaptation results in better subject motivation and consequently in longer—more intense
sessions. An ANOVA test confirmed significantly larger number of
movement repetitions performed by subjects when the adaptation
was effective (p = 0.001). Subjects performed a larger number of
repetitions in session with effective adaptation also when considering the wrist (p = 0.025) and the hand (p = 0.01) separately,
as shown in Fig. 6. Although Pearson’s correlation test shows that
number of movements and session duration are significantly correlated (R = 0.377, p < 0.001), efficacy of the adaptation does
not have a significant effect on training duration (p = 0.066).
When considering the breakdown of number of movements per
session category, as depicted in Fig. 7, we can see a distinct difference between session types which is reported as significant by
ANOVA results when considering wrist (p = 0.04) and hand only
(p < 0.001). Contrast analysis reveals that challenging–then supporting and challenging sessions led to higher number of movement repetitions with respect to other types of session (p < 0.05
in all cases). Moreover, no statistically significant difference in session duration was found among categories.
4. Discussion

3.3. Performance of the adaptation algorithm

4.1. Amount of exercise

The adaptation process ran for 123 sessions of wrist exercise
and for 125 hand exercise sessions. Out of these 248 sessions, there
have been 195 cases (combining hand and wrist frequencies) of
effective adaptation. The frequency of each of the session types is
shown in Fig. 4. Table 4 shows how the number of observations
differ between wrist and hand exercises. Regarding the wrist, the
adaptation has been effective in 105 episodes (85%). This includes

In this study, we considered data from a subset of subjects
who participated in an ongoing SCRIPT study [33]. The participants
(seven subjects with chronic stroke) covered a wide range of
impairment (Fugl-Meyer [34] score ranging from 9 to 56, Action
Research Arm Test [35] ranging from 3 to 54). During training,
participants were remotely supervised, offline, so they had to
choose their own training moment and duration during the day.

A. Basteris et al. / Robotics and Autonomous Systems 73 (2015) 144–154

151

Table 4
Number of observations of different session types for hand and wrist exercises.
Effective

Wrist
Hand
Total

Ineffective

Challenging–then supporting

Challenging

Supporting

Under-challenging

Under-supporting

1
11
12

94
67
161

10
12
22

18
1
19

0
34
34

123
125
248

Fig. 5. Number of training sessions for each of the five types, for each subject, for wrist (a) and hand (b) exercises.

Fig. 6. Efficacy of adaptation in making subjects perform higher number of
movement repetitions per session.

Overall, they did not practise as much as advised (6 sessions of
30 min each per week). However, the amount of exercise was solely
their choice and this led to high variability in session durations,
ranging from 4.4 to 29.7 min per day across subjects.
It is also noteworthy that, even in this small sample, there
were strong differences in training—arising again from individual
choices. By observing the number of hand and wrist movements,
one can notice that some subjects trained primarily on either hand
(nl01, it02) or wrist movement (nl03, nl05) while the remaining
subjects (nl02, nl04, it04) tended to practise both hand and wrist
movements.

Fig. 7. Role of challenge in increasing the number of movement repetitions per session. Note the higher number of repetitions for challenging and challenging–then
supporting categories in comparison to all others.

4.2. Game difficulty and change of score in different types of sessions
Based on the existing literature in learning theory and the
challenge point framework [20], we proposed a framework for
the classification of the session types based on the pattern of
the task difficulty obtained by an adaptive mechanism. These
types are challenging, challenging–then supporting, supporting,
under-supportingand under-challenging. This categorization can be
applied to any context in which there is an automatic adaptation of

152

A. Basteris et al. / Robotics and Autonomous Systems 73 (2015) 144–154

the task difficulty. We showed that regardless of duration, number
and type of movements, each session can be classified as one of
these types. Although there is a strong variation among movement
repetitions reflected by the lag–lead score, its average value across
one session can be used as an indicator for the performance of
the subject. In particular, by considering its value and the pattern
visible in game difficulty changes, one can assess whether the
assigned task has been of adequate difficulty for a subject.
4.3. Performance of the adaptation algorithm
We proposed a mechanism of adaptation based on a spatiotemporal kinematic parameter, a lag–lead index, in order to adapt
the task speed in a robot-assisted exercise. In this domain, one
typical approach is that of using speed, time or the EMG signal
to modulate the impedance of a robot [24]. This differs from our
case, in which given the passive nature of our device, changing
system impedance during interaction was not possible. Instead,
our proposed approach used the audio–visual channel and speed
of the stimuli presentation to provide a varying level of challenge
during the interaction based on user’s performance.
Overall, our algorithm was effective in 79% of the sessions.
Considering only the wrist movement, its effectiveness was higher
(85%). In this case, ineffective cases consisted only in underchallenging sessions. Such case has only the minor disadvantage
of a too easy exercise, thus possibly boring the subject. It is also
remarkable that such condition occurred only for those patients
mildly impaired (nl01, nl04, it04). Instead, those patients who
practised mostly the wrist movements (nl03, nl05) experienced
mostly challenging sessions, and eventually supporting exercises.
Regarding hand movements, the adaptive system was less
effective (72%) when compared to the wrist, yet still presenting
a substantial number of cases where our algorithm was effective.
In particular, opposite to the case of the wrist, failures consisted
nearly exclusively of under-supporting sessions. This occurred for
five subjects out of seven. These included those mildly impaired
for whom the wrist exercise was too easy. Another aspect which
suggests the higher difficulty of the hand exercise is the larger
number of challenging—then supporting sessions for the hand,
compared to wrist movements.
4.4. Relation between categories and number of movement repetitions
The adaptation mechanism enhanced subjects’ engagement, as
proven by the increased number of repetitions in case of effective
adaptation. Although the average number of movement repetitions
resulted higher for challenging–then supporting sessions, there are
a large number of outliers for the challenging type. In many cases,
subjects performed within a challenging session more repetitions
than in a challenging–then supporting one, i.e. they performed better for a longer time. This confirms the effect of challenge on subjects’ motivation, i.e. by challenging the subject it is possible to
extend the training intensity without affecting his/her performance. As a confirmation of the role of challenge in motivation we
also observed that subjects tended to perform more repetitions of
either wrist or hand movement when under-supported (i.e. overchallenged) rather than under-challenged.
5. Conclusions and future work
In this feasibility study, we used a lag–lead score to evaluate the
performance of stroke survivors during robot-assisted wrist and

hand movements. This was calculated as the fraction of movement
in which one is moving in advance of a reference trajectory. An
adaptive controller based on the history of such score, assigning
faster tasks if one was performing above the desired level and
slower if below this level, successfully maintained the average
lag–lead score within a target range. We proposed a framework for
the classification of session types based on patterns in the process
of adaptation. These types were challenging, fatiguing, supporting,
under-supportingand under-challenging. Overall, the adaptation
was successful in maintaining the score within the target range in
79% of cases.
We observed different behaviours amongst hand and wrist
movements, representing a relative easiness in wrist movement
compared to hand movement. These observations can be used towards further tuning of the lag–lead reference trajectory models
as well as defining interactive games where difficulty in individual
movement components, i.e. wrist flexion and extension or hand
opening and closing, can be separately tuned. In this study, wrist
actions occurred mostly during the crocco game where subjects’
wrist flexion and extension resulted in diving under or jumping
over approaching obstacles. We used the minimum jerk trajectory
model for wrist flexion and extension. Based on our observations, it
appears that our chosen model provided a challenging interaction,
while having only one occurrence of challenging–then supporting.
This was different for the hand, as more occurrence of challenging–then supporting was observed. In our future studies, we intend
to identify whether this observation was due to the use of different reference trajectory models used, or if it occurred due to the
way games reacted to these gestures differently, or whether this
was linked to the state of wrist and hand in individual’s recovery
from stroke. Also, another point for future assessment is with regards to use of different sensors for measurement of wrist flexion
and extension, versus using bending sensors to infer position of the
finger tips.
It is remarkable that our system, as many of those in the field
of rehabilitation robotics, does not necessarily comply with all the
several definitions of robot, although consisting of sensors, actuators and a decision making component. Our research is hence applicable in the field of robot-assisted training and rehabilitation
robotics, providing a mechanism of adaptation based on subjects’
motor performance. The classification of sessions among different
categories based on the difficulty patterns and the subjects’ performance can be used in the domain of rehabilitation engineering to
ensure the optimal progression of the therapeutic exercise.
One of the limitations of this study is the small sample size,
also taking into account the high-variability of factors introduced
by the protocol design. In current study, it is not possible to draw
inference from patient’s level of impairment in conjunction with
the observed categories in their sessions. The same adaptation
mechanism is hence currently being tested on a larger number of
subjects thus to see if patient’s impairment is a likely contributor
to the type of challenge mostly overcome.
Also, a further limitation arises from the small number of games
available. In a planned future study, we will increase the number
of available games, thus to provide chances to provide a more
appealing context for practice, hoping to retain patients in an
exercise session for a longer duration. Presence of cases where
under-challenging or under-supporting category is observed can
be indicative of apparent ease or overwhelming task difficulty as
possible by one game. Having a larger subset of games would allow
us to compare and contrast between presence of these categories
and patient’s choice of preferred games and will enable us to
control for presence of fatigue. Also, these new games will be
tested with an active device which will allow control of assistive
or resistive forces to, respectively, severely or mildly impaired
subjects.

A. Basteris et al. / Robotics and Autonomous Systems 73 (2015) 144–154

In summary, the findings from the present study indicate that
the lag–lead model is promising to use as an adaptation regulator
to adapt exercise difficulty within a game to the current performance of a subject.
Acknowledgements
This work has been partially funded under Grant FP7-ICT288698(SCRIPT) of the European Community Seventh Framework
Programme. We are grateful to SCRIPT consortium for their ongoing commitment and dedication to the project and to a large number of stroke patients, their families and healthcare professionals
who have provided us with formative and summative feedback
during the development of this project.
References
[1] C.J. Vugts, L.F.J. Van der Velden, L. Hingstman (NIVEL), F. Van der Velde, W. Van
der Windt (Prismant), Behoefteraming fysiotherapeuten 2002-2015. Rapport
NIVEL, 2003: www.nivel.nl.
[2] N.M. Hjelm, Benefits and drawbacks of telemedicine, J. Telemedicine and
Telecare 11 (2005) 60–70.
[3] J.W. Krakauer, Arm function after stroke: from physiology to recovery, Semin.
Neurol. 25 (4) (2005) 384–395.
[4] J.D. Schaechter, Motor rehabilitation and brain plasticity after hemiparetic
stroke, Prog. Neurobiol. 73 (1) (2004) 61–72.
[5] N.A. Borghese, M. Pirovano, P.L. Lanzi, S. Wuest, E.D. de Bruin, Computational
intelligence and game design for effective at-home stroke rehabilitation,
Games Health J. 2 (2) (2013) 81–88.
[6] G. Kwakkel, R. van Peppen, R.C. Wagenaar, S. Wood Dauphinee, C. Richards,
A. Ashburn, K. Miller, N. Lincoln, C. Partridge, I. Wellwood, P. Langhorne, Effects
of augmented exercise therapy time after stroke: a meta-analysis, Stroke 35
(11) (2004) 2529–2539.
[7] D.J. Reinkensmeyer, J.L. Emken, S.C. Cramer, Robotics, motor learning, and
neurologic recovery, Annu. Rev. Biomed. Eng. 6 (2004) 497–525.
[8] V.S. Huang, J.W. Krakauer, Robotic neurorehabilitation: a computational motor
learning perspective, J. Neuroeng. Rehabil. 6 (2009) 5.
[9] E.H. van Asseldonk, M. Wessels, A.H. Stienen, F.C. van der Helm, H. van der
Kooij, Influence of haptic guidance in learning a novel visuomotor task,
J. Physiol. (Paris) 103 (3–5) (2009) 276–285.
[10] J. Mehrholz, A. Hädrich, T. Platz, J. Kugler, M. Pohl, Electromechanical and
robot-assisted arm training for improving generic activities of daily living, arm
function, and arm muscle strength after stroke, Cochrane Database Syst. Rev.
6 (2012) CD006876.
[11] G.B. Prange, M.J.A. Jannink, C.G.M. Groothuis, H.J. Hermens, I.J. MJ, Systematic
review of the effect of robot-aided therapy on recovery of the hemiparetic arm
after stroke, J. Rehabil. Res. Dev. 43 (2) (2006) 171–184.
[12] G. Kwakkel, B.J. Kollen, H.I. Krebs, Effects of robot-assisted therapy on upper
limb recovery after stroke: a systematic review, Neurorehabil. Neural Repair
22 (2) (2008) 111–121.
[13] J. Mehrholz, A. Hädrich, T. Platz, J. Kugler, M. Pohl, Electromechanical and
robot-assisted arm training for improving generic activities of daily living, arm
function, and arm muscle strength after stroke, Cochrane Database Syst. Rev.
6 (2012).
[14] L. Oujamaa, I. Relave, J. Froger, D. Mottet, J.-Y. Pelissier, Rehabilitation of arm
function after stroke. literature review, Ann. Phys. Rehabil. Med. 52 (2009)
269–293.
[15] S.L.P. Ates, H. van der Kooij, A.H. Stienen, SCRIPT passive orthosis: design and
technical evaluation of the wrist and hand orthosis for rehabilitation training
at home, in International Conference on Rehabilitation Robotics (ICORR), 2013,
Seattle, USA.
[16] G.B. Prange, H.J. Hermens, J. Schäfer, N. Nasr, G. Mountain, A.H.A. Stienen,
F. Amirabdollahian, SCRIPT: tele-robotics at home—functional architecture
and clinical application, in: Proceedings of the 6th International Symposium
on E-Health Services and Technologies (EHST) and the 3rd International
Conference on Green IT Solutions, SciTePress, Geneva, Switzerland, 2012.
[17] B.E. Fisher, K.J. Sullivan, Activity-dependent factors affecting poststroke
functional outcomes, Top Stroke Rehabil. 8 (3) (2001) 31–44.
[18] M. Lotze, C. Braun, N. Birbaumer, S. Anders, L.G. Cohen, Motor learning elicited
by voluntary drive, Brain 126 (Pt 4) (2003) 866–872.
[19] L.E. Kahn, M. Averbuch, W.Z. Rymer, D.J. Reinkensmeyer, Comparison of Robotassisted Reaching to Free Reaching in Promoting Recovery From Chronic
Stroke, IOS Press, Amsterdam, the Netherlands, 2001.
[20] M.A. Guadagnoli, T.D. Lee, Challenge point: a framework for conceptualizing
the effects of various practice conditions in motor learning, J. Mot. Behav. 36
(2) (2004) 212–224.
[21] N. Sanford, Self and Society: Social Change and Individual Development,
Transaction Books, 2006.
[22] J.L. Emken, R. Benitez, D.J. Reinkensmeyer, Human–robot cooperative
movement training: learning a novel sensory motor transformation during
walking with robotic assistance-as-needed, J. Neuroeng. Rehabil. 4 (2007) 8.

153

[23] A. Panarese, R. Colombo, I. Sterpi, F. Pisano, S. Micera, Tracking motor
improvement at the subtask level during robot-aided neurorehabilitation of
stroke patients, Neurorehabil. Neural Repair 26 (7) (2012) 822–833.
[24] H.I. Krebs, J.J. Palazzolo, L. Dipietro, M. Ferraro, J. Krol, K. Rannekleiv, B.T. Volpe,
N. Hogan, Rehabilitation robotics: Performance-based progressive robotassisted therapy, Auton. Robots 15 (1) (2003) 7–20.
[25] L. Zimmerli, C. Krewer, R. Gassert, F. Muller, R. Riener, L. Lunenburger,
Validation of a mechanism to balance exercise difficulty in robot-assisted
upper-extremity rehabilitation after stroke, J. Neuroeng. Rehabil. 9 (2012) 6.
[26] A. Koenig, D. Novak, X. Omlin, M. Pulfer, E. Perreault, L. Zimmerli, M. Mihelj, R.
Riener, Real-time closed-loop control of cognitive load in neurological patients
during robot-assisted gait training, IEEE Trans. Neural Syst. Rehabil. Eng. 19 (4)
(2011) 453–464.
[27] V. Squeri, L. Masia, P. Giannoni, G. Sandini, P. Morasso, Wrist rehabilitation in
chronic stroke patients by means of adaptive, progressive robot aided therapy,
IEEE Trans. Neural. Syst. Rehabil. Eng. (2013).
[28] A. Basteris, F. Amirabdollahian, Adaptive human–robot interaction based on
lag-lead modelling for home-based stroke rehabilitation, in IEEE Systems, Man
and Cybernetics, 2013, Manchester (UK).
[29] R. Chemuturi, F. Amirabdollahian, K. Dautenhahn, Adaptive training algorithm
for robot-assisted upper-arm rehabilitation, applicable to individualised and
therapeutic human–robot interaction, J. Neuroeng. Rehabil. 10 (2013) 102.
[30] I. Carpinella, J. Jonsdottir, M. Ferrarin, Multi-finger coordination in healthy
subjects and stroke patients: a mathematical modelling approach, J. Neuroeng.
Rehabil. 8 (2011) 19.
[31] T. Flash, N. Hogan, The coordination of arm movements: an experimentally
confirmed mathematical model, J. Neurosci. 5 (7) (1985) 1688–1703.
[32] S.M. Nijenhuis, G.B. Prange, J. Schäfer, J.S. Rietman, J.H. Buurke, Feasibility of
a personalized arm/hand training system for use at home after stroke: results
so far, in: International NeuroRehabilitation Symposium (INRS), 2013, Zürich,
Switzerland.
[33] G.B. Prange, M. N S, P. Sale, A. Cesario, N. Nasr, G. Mountain, F. Amirabdollahian,
J.H. Buurke, Preliminary findings of feasibility and compliance of technologysupported distal arm training at home after stroke, in: International Congress
on Neurorehabilitation—ICNR 2014, 2014. Aalborg (DK).
[34] A. Fugl-Meyer, L. Jääskö, I. Leyman, S. Olsson, S. Steglind, The post-stroke
hemiplegic patient. 1. a method for evaluation of physical performance, Scand.
J. Rehabil. Med. 7 (1) (1974) 13–31.
[35] R.C. Lyle, A performance test for assessment of upper limb function in physical
rehabilitation treatment and research, Int. J. Rehab. Res. 4 (4) (1981) 483–492.

Angelo Basteris is a Postdoctoral Researcher at the School
of Computer Science, University of Hertfordshire, working
on the SCRIPT project. He was graduated with a Master’s
degree in Bioengineering from the University in Genoa
in 2007. There, he completed his Ph.D. in Bioengineering
during 2011, studying interactive technologies to facilitate
motor skill learning and neuromotor recovery.
His major interest is the application of robots and
motion analysis systems in rehabilitation. He is also interested in the understanding of motor skill learning in
healthy subjects.
His research activity includes movement analysis of wheelchair propulsion,
robotic assistance for development of novel motor skills and for intermanual transfer of handwriting, robot-therapy for persons with multiple sclerosis and Parkinson’s disease.

Sharon Nijenhuis is a Human Movement Scientist, Junior
Researcher at Roessingh Research and Development (in
Enschede, The Netherlands). Her previous activity includes
research on the direct effects of providing ankle-foot
orthosis in (sub)acute stroke rehabilitation and a measure
of the construct validity of the VOAA module DDD-R to
assess the spontaneous arm and hand use in typically
developing children.

Jaap Buurke is a Senior Researcher working at Roessingh
Research & Development (in Enschede, The Netherlands),
the largest Dutch scientific research centre in rehabilitation technology. Since 2009 he is also a Scientific Track Coordinator at the same institute, where he started working
as a Physiotherapist in 1985.

154

A. Basteris et al. / Robotics and Autonomous Systems 73 (2015) 144–154

Gerdienke Prange is a Human Movement Scientist working at Roessingh Research & Development (in Enschede,
The Netherlands), the largest Dutch scientific research
centre in rehabilitation technology. She received her Ph.D.
at the University of Twente (in Enschede, The Netherlands) for her research on the application of robotic devices for rehabilitation of the arm after stroke. Currently
she is involved in several national and international
research projects concerning stimulation of motor relearning in neurological disorders using rehabilitation
technology (including robotics and virtual reality), mainly
for the upper extremity. As a Senior Researcher, she develops and leads the research
line on Active Therapeutic Devices, focusing on the application of technology to support rehabilitation of people with neurological disorders. Her main research interests lie in evaluating the impact of rehabilitation technology on neurophysiological,
biomechanical and clinical levels.

Farshid Amirabdollahian is a Reader in Adaptive Systems
at the School of Computer Science, University of Hertfordshire. He currently leads the adaptive systems’ assistive and rehabilitation robotics laboratory. He received his
Ph.D. in 2004 from Reading University School of Cybernetics, focusing on robot-mediated therapy for stroke rehabilitation. He has undertaken research in assistive and
rehabilitation robotics since 1999, by involvement in
FP5/6/7 projects such as GENTLE/S, i-Match, LIREC and ROBOSKIN. His research has a specific focus on adaptive and
personalized training. He is a member of the IEEE Engineering in Medicine & Biology, Robotics & Automation, and Systems, Man & Cybernetics societies. He is currently coordinating the ACCOMPANY (FP7 STREP) and
SCRIPT (FP7 STREP) projects while contributing to CORBYS (FP7 IP).


