Robotics and Autonomous Systems 73 (2015) 123–134

Contents lists available at ScienceDirect

Robotics and Autonomous Systems
journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/robot

A light-weight active orthosis for hip movement assistance
Francesco Giovacchini a , Federica Vannetti b , Matteo Fantozzi a , Marco Cempini a ,
Mario Cortese a , Andrea Parri a , Tingfang Yan a , Dirk Lefeber c , Nicola Vitiello a,b,∗
a

The BioRobotics Institute, Scuola Superiore Sant’Anna, viale Rinaldo Piaggio 34, 56025, Pontedera (PI), Italy

b

Don Carlo Gnocchi Foundation, via di Scandicci 256, 50143, Firenze, Italy

c

Department of Mechanical Engineering, Faculty of Applied Sciences, Vrije Universiteit Brussel, Pleinlaan 2, B-1050 Brussels, Belgium

highlights
•
•
•
•
•

Development of a novel light-weight wearable powered bilateral pelvis orthosis.
Design of a novel compact, light-weight series-elastic actuator (SEA).
SEA closed-loop torque control bandwidth equal to 15 Hz.
SEA output impedance ranges from 1 to 35 N m /rad in human gait frequency spectrum.
The overall system usability was proved by tests with a healthy subject.

article

info

Article history:
Available online 16 September 2014
Keywords:
Lower-limb assistive exoskeleton
Wearable robot
Powered orthosis
Assistive technology
Gait aid
Series elastic actuator

abstract
In the last decades, wearable powered orthoses have been developed with the aim of augmenting or
assisting motor activities. In particular, among many applications, wearable powered orthoses have been
also introduced in the state of the art with the goal of providing lower-limb movement assistance in
locomotion-related tasks (e.g.: walking, ascending/descending stairs) in scenarios of activities of daily
living. In this paper we present a light-weight active orthosis endowed with two series elastic actuators
for hip flexion–extension assistance. Along with the description of its mechatronic modules, we report
the experimental characterization of the performance of the actuation and control system, as well as
the usability test carried out with a healthy subject. Results showed a suitable dynamic behavior of the
actuation unit: the closed-loop torque control bandwidth is about 15 Hz and the output impedance ranges
from about 1 N m/rad to 35 N m/rad in the frequency spectrum between 0.2 and 3.2 Hz. Results from the
tests with the healthy subject proved the overall system usability: the subject could walk with the device
without being hindered and while he received a smooth assistive flexion–extension torque profile on both
hip articulations.
© 2014 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

1. Introduction
Aging of the population is one of the most critical challenges
current industrialized societies, characterized by a low birth rate
and long life expectation, will face in the next years, and threatens
the sustainability of our social welfare. In 40 years from now,
nearly 35% of the European population will be over 60 year-old,
resulting in the urgency to provide solutions enabling our aging
society to remain active, creative, productive, and – above all –
independent [1,2].

∗ Corresponding author at: The BioRobotics Institute, Scuola Superiore Sant’Anna,
viale Rinaldo Piaggio 34, 56025, Pontedera (PI), Italy. Tel.: +39 050 883 472, +39 338
681 2352 (Mobile).
E-mail address: n.vitiello@sssup.it (N. Vitiello).
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.robot.2014.08.015
0921-8890/© 2014 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

Aging may cause reduced mobility, which leads to loss of
independence [3–5]. According to the investigation accounted
in [6], the spontaneous walking speed decreases by about 1% per
year from age 60 onward, and the observed decline of maximum
walking speed is even greater. Gait disorders and lower-limb
impairments are also common and often devastating companions
of aging [1–3]: several population-based studies showed a 35%
prevalence of gait disorders among persons over age 70, and
80% over 85 years of age [4]. Gait disturbances have major
consequences, including falls (leading to major fractures or head
trauma), the number of which is expected to reach 500,000 by
the year 2040 in US, representing a total annual cost of 16
billion dollars [7]. Senile gait disorders could also be an early
manifestation of underlying pathologies, which might not only
alter gait directly, but may also indirectly cause a subjective

124

F. Giovacchini et al. / Robotics and Autonomous Systems 73 (2015) 123–134

sensation of instability and insecurity, forcing individuals to adopt
a more cautious gait [8–15].
A possible scenario for the next years is that aging-related
gait syndromes will lead to an increase of the number of people
needing assistance in their daily living activities, e.g. basic mobility,
personal hygiene and safety awareness. In this scenario, it is
plausible that people will become progressively more reliant on
technology to meet their desire to live independently, actively
and satisfactorily. Among all the assistive devices springing up,
wearable robotic orthoses (namely ‘‘exoskeletons’’) were proposed
as a solution by many research teams active in the field of
medical robotics to assist people (mostly elderly) affected by gait
disorders [16–18].
An exoskeleton for gait assistance is generally anthropomorphic
in nature, ‘‘worn’’ by the user, and fits closely to his or her body
[19]. Given the close interaction with the user, the robot should be
light-weight and take into account the user’s joints range of motion
(RoM), anthropometry, and kinematics to provide a comfortable
physical human–robot interface (pHRI) [20–22]. Furthermore, the
actuation and control of the robot should allow the user to
implement his or her own movement without hindrance while
receiving a certain assistance safely: in this framework, a very
efficient and often adopted design methodology foresees the
endowing of a mechanical compliance between the exoskeleton
actuators and the user/robot interface, the so-called Series Elastic
Actuator (SEA) strategy [23].
Many robotic exoskeletons can be found in the current state of
the art: the broad variability in mechatronic design, control and
human–robot interface [19] of these devices is due to differences
in the targeted end users and expected usage. Some of them
have been designed as unilateral support, in order to assist poststroke patients. ALEX is a leg exoskeleton whose hip and knee
joints are powered by linear actuators [24], controlled by means
of an adaptive impedance controller: it is worth to note that
ALEX is the only lower-limb exoskeleton which provides passive
degrees of freedom (DoFs) allowing vertical and lateral movement
of the pelvis, thus a more natural gait pattern. Sawicki et al. [25]
investigated on ankle–foot and knee–ankle–foot orthoses powered
by McKibben-type pneumatic muscles, which provide an inherent
transmission compliance, but with the drawback of requiring a
double actuation (antagonistic actuators arrangement). Recently,
at Vrije Universiteit Brussel (Brussels, Belgium), a knee–ankle
foot orthosis has been developed and tested [26]: in this case
pleated pneumatic artificial muscles were used as actuators and
a proxy-based sliding mode strategy ensured a safe human–robot
interaction. A huge number of bilateral active orthoses have
been presented, as well. Relevant bilateral orthoses for poststroke patients are the LOKOMAT [27] and the LOPES [28], the
latter being introduced as the first lower-limb exoskeleton with
inherently compliant joints. The LOPES is indeed capable of a high
assistance while keeping a low output impedance, thanks to its
SEA actuation strategy [28]. Wearable devices for paraplegic or
hemiplegic rehabilitation, aiming at replacing locomotion in case
of no residual mobility, are the Vanderbilt powered limb orthosis
[29] and HAL, an active suit for motion assistance commercialized
by Cyberdyne (Tsukuba, Japan) [30]. Other exoskeletons have
been specifically designed for assisting the cautious gait of elderly
people, such as the exoskeleton EXPOS reported in [31], while
other researches focused on devices for body weight support,
such as the Moonwalker [32] and the Bodyweight Support
Assist by Honda (Honda, Tokyo, Japan). Furthermore, lower-limb
exoskeletons were also designed for augmenting human strength,
enabling to carry heavy loads, mainly for military purposes: wellknown examples are the BLEEX [33], the SARCOS exoskeleton
(Sarcos, US) and the MIT passive exoskeleton [34], all developed
within the frame of the DARPA program Exoskeletons for Human
Performance Augmentation (EHPA, [19]).

It is worth to cite also single-joint active orthoses, such as
the SERKA, an active knee orthosis addressing stiff knee gait in
stroke patients [35] actuated by a cable-driven rotational SEA, the
Dynamically Controlled Ankle–Foot Orthosis [36] and the Adaptive
Ankle–Foot Orthosis by Blaya et al. [37], which are examples of
simpler active orthoses making use of SEAs to assist push-off or
to correct dropped foot gait. Examples of active orthoses for the
hip flexion–extension assistance are the devices introduced by do
Nascimento et al. [38] and the hip exoskeleton designed by Ferris
et al. [39], both powered by artificial pneumatic muscles, and the
Stride Management Assist by Honda (Honda, Tokyo, Japan).
In this paper, we introduce the design of a light-weight active
pelvis orthosis (APO), which was preliminary presented in [40], for
assisting hip flexion–extension (Fig. 1). The device was conceived
with two innovative solutions. Firstly, it has a novel, compact
and light-weight SEA unit which exploits a custom torsional
spring. Secondly, we proposed an optimized design based on
extremely light-weight carbon-fiber linkages, embedding manual
adjustments for fitting the orthosis to a wide range of user
sizes, and passive DoFs which follow the gait motions out of
the flexion/extension plane (pelvis tilting, thigh abduction). The
device hence ensures good kinematics compatibility, enhancing
the comfort of the human–robot physical interaction, avoiding
limitations and constrains to user’s gait pattern, and addressing the
match of intra- and inter-subject anthropometric variability.
Along with the description of the mechatronic modules of
APO, this paper also reports its experimental characterizations.
In particular, the performance of dynamic response of SEA, and
overall usability of the system in a gait assistance task. The usability
is tested by controlling APO with an adaptive motion control
strategy which was early introduced in [17,18].
The paper is structured as follows: Section 2 describes
the design of the light-weight active orthosis. Results of the
experimental characterization are reported in Section 3 and
discussed in Section 4. Finally, Section 5 draws the conclusions.
2. Mechatronic design
This section presents the main technical solutions of the active
orthosis we conceived for the APO system. Hereafter we describe
the three subsystems we developed: namely the mechanical
structure, the actuation unit and the control system.
2.1. Mechanical structure
The device is sustained by an horizontal C-shaped frame,
surrounding the user hips and the back of the pelvis, and interfaced
to the trunk by means of three orthotic shells (two lateral and
one rear); the frame carries the two actuation units. The structure
is realized in two 2.5 mm thickness carbon-fiber lateral arms,
connected through a rear straight bar. The rear bar is composed
by an external guide in which two internal rods can slide: the bar
length can then be adjusted in order to match the distance between
the two lateral shells, ensuring the frame to be tightly attached
to the upper body in the medial–lateral direction (Fig. 2(a)). One
of the two sliding rods can be locked by a fast-detach pin (for
coarse regulation and fast don–doff procedure), and finely adjusted
thanks to a leadscrew mechanism. In order to further make
easier the wearing procedure the structure can be also completely
separated into two parts (right and left).
The human and robot hip flexion–extension axes are aligned
in the sagittal plane thanks to the adjustment of the horizontal
and vertical positions of the rails in the cuff-frame interface.
Furthermore the back orthotic shell is fixed on the rear bar and
adjusted by a screw mechanism to assess a correct and ergonomic
pushing support on the lumbar region of the subject (Fig. 2(a)), for
a correct transmission of the assistive torque. The entire subsystem
reaches a total weight of 0.8 kg.

F. Giovacchini et al. / Robotics and Autonomous Systems 73 (2015) 123–134

125

Fig. 1. Overview on the APO. (a) Frontal, lateral and back view of APO worn by a healthy subject. (b) Frontal, lateral and back view of the APO CAD model.

Fig. 2. Overview of APO subsystems. (a) C-shaped frame connected to user’s trunk.
(1) Rear bar connecting the two carbon-fiber arms. (2) Detachable pin for regulation.
(3) Leadscrew mechanism for fine adjustment. (4) Rails for flexion–extension axes
alignment. (5) Back support interface with the subject back, namely lumbar region.
(6) Screw mechanism for adjustment. (b) Thigh linkage. (7) Carbon-fiber linkage.
(8) Orthotic shell interfaced with user’s thigh. (9) Sliding and rotational adjustment
of the orthotic shells. (10) Passive abduction–adduction rotational axis.

The actuated axes drive two carbon-fiber links shown in
Fig. 2(b), molded with a shape sweeping from the lateral to the back

side of the thigh. The carbon fiber thickness is 2 mm; this structural
optimization leads to the production of light-weight links (less
than 0.3 kg for each one) while the necessary structural stiffness is
still preserved. The carbon composites are coupled to the rest of the
mechanics by means of aluminum inserts glued to the carbon fiber
through a bi-component epoxy resin (Scotch-WeldTM 9323 - 3MTM ,
Milan, Italy). The inserts at the interface between carbon-fiber and
metal components (the thigh links and the trunk support parts)
are provided with slots, that guarantee the needed regulations
towards a comfortable wearing and the human–robot joint axes
alignment (Fig. 2(b)).
The shape of the links allows to swap them in the exoskeleton
assembly, connecting the actuation axes with the front side of
the thigh, without affecting the functionality. This additional
possibility may be useful in those cases in which the rear part of
the thighs needs to be kept free from any component, for instance
to allow the user to sit without hindrance.
Thigh links are also endowed with a passive rotational DoF for
abduction–adduction: this joint is located in a distal position with
respect to the flexion–extension joint (60 mm below): this choice
allows the abduction–adduction passive DoF to be not loaded by
the weight of the actuation unit. Although the rotation axis of this
passive DoF is not aligned with the one of the human joints, it still
contributes to provide a comfortable interaction and a not rigid
constraint of the user leg while walking.
In order to comply with different lower-limb lengths, the
vertical position of the two plastic orthotic shells, which encircle
the user’s thigh, is adjustable thanks to lockable sliders situated
at the tip of the carbon-fiber linkages (Fig. 2(b)). These lockable
sliders are endowed with a further regulation: it is possible to
rotate the shells with respect to the linkage to find the most
comfortable position for each user.
The APO physically interfaces with the user’s body in five zones:
the three thermo-shaped orthotic trunk shells stabilize the frame
over the user’s waist, and the two upper-leg shells are tightened
around the thighs by means of elastic belts. This solution should
guarantee a comfortable interaction and a safe transmission of
the assistive torque by preventing the human–robot interaction
surfaces from slippages. Moreover, the use of a soft orthopedic
material and a wide contact area contribute to reduce and

126

F. Giovacchini et al. / Robotics and Autonomous Systems 73 (2015) 123–134

Fig. 3. Exploded view of the series elastic actuation unit. (1) DC motor with
embedded incremental encoder. (2) Harmonic Drive. (3) 4-bar transmission
mechanism. (4) Torsional spring. (5) Absolute encoder.

distribute the pressure on the user’s skin. In addition, two straps
allow a portion of the APO weight to be supported by the shoulders,
and thus avoid the trunk from being loaded with an excessive
lateral pressure.
All the orthotic shells were custom manufactured with a twolayered structure: a 3 mm-thick internal layer of thermoplasR
tic polyethylene foam (Plastazote⃝
617S7, Otto Bock, Duderstadt,
Germany), for moisture draining and skin transpiration, and a
R
Polypropy3 mm-thick outer layer of polypropylene (ThermoLyn⃝
lene 616T20, Otto Bock, Duderstadt, Germany). These shells come
in different sizes, and can also be tailor-made on each subject.
2.2. Actuation units
APO is endowed with two actuation units, one for each
hip flexion–extension joint (Fig. 3), mounted on the lateral
arms. The actuation unit employs a series elastic actuator (SEA)
architecture [22]. SEAs have been successfully applied in the field
of wearable powered robots mostly to solve safety issues and
reduce the inherent output impedance [41–43]. In this case, the
actuation is not rigid and allows minimum joint output impedance
across the frequency spectrum of gait. Furthermore, variations in
the output impedance can still be achieved by means of closed-loop
interaction control strategies [41–43].
The motor units have been designed taking as reference the
hip angle and torque profiles reported by the Winter dataset: in
particular we assumed a natural cadence of 105 steps/min and a
user weight of 80 kg [44]. The target amount of assistance was set
to 50% of the human torque required during ground-level walking:
hence, the actuator was designed in order to provide a maximum
torque of 35 N · m.
The SEA in-series elasticity was realized by a custom torsional
spring, which achieves a stiffness of 100 N · m/rad — a value
comparable with the human hip average stiffness during groundlevel walking [45] — and bears the torsion stress up to the
design value without neither yielding, nor presenting hysteretic or
non-linear behavior. The spring compliance prevents the subject
from an uncomfortable (or even painful) interaction with an
excessively stiff device in case of high-frequency movements
(e.g. sudden spasms, interaction with the ground). The same spring
has been used to design the actuation unit of the NEUROExos
elbow exoskeleton developed at The BioRobotics Institute (Scuola
Superiore Sant’Anna, Pisa, Italy), and its design and experimental
characterization were already presented in [46].
With reference to Fig. 3, each actuation unit is deployed
around two parallel axes. One is the axis of the 100 W DC motor
R
(EC60, Maxon Motor⃝
, Sachseln, Switzerland) equipped with an
R
incremental encoder (1024 ppr, MILE, Maxon Motor⃝
, Sachseln,
Switzerland) and coupled with a 80:1 Harmonic Drive (HD) (CPLR
17A-080-2A, Harmonic Drive⃝
, Limburg, Germany) reduction
stage. On the other axis (which is the one actually collocated
with the human hip flexion–extension axis) there is the torsional
spring in series with a 32-bit absolute encoder (RESOLUTETM ,

Fig. 4. APO passive and active DoFs. (a) Height regulation of the thigh orthotic shell,
range of user’s trunk dimensions and RoM of passive abduction–adduction DoF. (b)
Human–robot joint axis alignment on lateral and sagittal plan, adjustment of trunk’s
orthotic shell on lateral plan and RoM of active flexion–extension DoF.
R
ring: RESA30USA052B, read head: RA32BAA052B30, Renishaw⃝
,
Gloucestershire, England), which measures the absolute hip joint
angle. Each actuation unit reaches a weight of 1.2 kg. By assuming a
range of movement of the human hip joint from −20° (minimum
extension angle during walking) to 90° (maximum flexion angle
in a seated position), we opted for a transmission means between
the two parallel axes based on a 4-bar mechanism, with a range of
motion between −30° and 110° (Fig. 4(b)), limited by emergency
mechanical stops. The two-axis configuration was chosen in order
to reduce the overall lateral encumbrance, namely 110 mm, due
to the length of the gear-motor unit and of the torsional spring.
Although this encumbrance is relatively small, this solution is a
limitation of the current design as it partly prevents the user from
swinging his or her arms. However, its encumbrance is comparable
to the one of other lower-limb exoskeletons [19].
The entire system has a total weight of 4.2 kg (this weight
excludes the control unit which is still remotely located in this
prototype) and the adjustable DoFs allow the system to comply
with a wide range of user’s body size (Fig. 4).

2.3. Control system
The APO control system is based on a hierarchical architecture
that comprises a low-level torque control layer (two independent
torque controls, one for each actuation unit) and a high-level layer
implementing an adaptive assistive strategy (Fig. 5(a)).
(1) Low-level torque control: the low-level controller is in charge
to manage the actuators in order to track the set torque value to
the moving linkage of the exoskeleton. The closed-loop control
architecture is that of a classical proportional–integral–derivative
(PID) regulator (Fig. 5(b)). The PID regulator operates on the error
between the desired torque τdes and the measured torque τ , and
returns an electrical current provided to the motor, within a
saturation interval of ±3.2 A corresponding to a torque range
of ±35 N · m. The motor current is controlled by means of
R
a commercial servo amplifier (EPOS2 70/10, Maxon Motor⃝
,
Sachseln, Switzerland). As it is explained in [22], bandwidth of
a SEA system controlled by means of a PID compensator can be
limited by design. Thus, PID regulator coefficients were tuned
manually to achieve the widest closed-loop bandwidth, as will be
shown in Section 3.2 with the characterization of the controller.
The measured torque is estimated from the deformation of
the torsional spring by means of the two encoders (respectively
measuring the Harmonic Drive output shaft angle θM and the
joint angle θJ ), the torsional stiffness KS being known. Since one
of the two encoders is incremental (the one on the motor side),
an initializing procedure was needed at the power-on of the
system, in order to correctly acquire the reference zero value of

F. Giovacchini et al. / Robotics and Autonomous Systems 73 (2015) 123–134

127

synchronization capability of adaptive oscillators can be exploited
to learn the phase of gait of the subject accomplishing a groundlevel walking task. For the APO high-level control we used a modified version of an Hopf oscillator as AO, and a set of 60 Gaussian
functions as kernel of the non-linear filter. Thanks to the capability of this architecture to – instead of doing mere synchronization
– learn the frequency (and then the phase) and the envelop of a
quasi-periodic teaching signal, we could track and learn the quasiperiodic behavior of each hip joint angle, and provide a reliable prediction of the joint angle vs. gait phase within the gait cycle. This
means that at each gait phase ϕ the AO and the non-linear filter
can provide an estimate of both the hip joint angle θˆJ (ϕ) and its
future value at a phase ϕ + ∆ ϕ , namely θˆJ (ϕ + ∆ ϕ), being ∆ ϕ
a phase lead tunable by the experimenter. The assistive torque is
then computed by setting the τdes = Kv · [θˆJ (ϕ + ∆ ϕ) − θˆJ (ϕ)],
being Kv a tuneable virtual stiffness. This way the user’s joints are
smoothly attracted towards their future positions by means of an
attractive virtual stiffness field, while leaving the opportunity to
the user to constantly change the frequency and shape of his or
her gait pattern.

Fig. 5. Scheme of the control system of APO. (a) Block diagram of the hierarchical
control architecture. (b) Low-level closed-loop torque control.

spring deformation, corresponding to a null transmitted torque:
this was achieved through a rigid pin, bypassing the torsional
spring (impeding its deformation and then keeping it unloaded)
during the exoskeleton starting, which was then removed after
initialization of the incremental encoder reference value.
(2) High-level assistive control: in order to be used as a wearable
active orthosis for human motion assistance, the torque control
should be able to provide the user with the assistive torque
with near-zero output impedance, i.e. with minimum to null
joint parasitic stiffness [43]. Aiming at the system usability in a
task of gait assistance, we opted for a high-level control strategy
that could provide a desired torque reference variable over the
stride. This way we could assess whether the closed-loop torque
control bandwidth was sufficiently large and the parasitic output
stiffness sufficiently low to allow the system to track the desired
torque with a relatively small error, at different gait speeds. As
an assistive control strategy we selected a model-free (it does not
require any a priori knowledge about the gait dynamics) algorithm
presented in a recent work by Ronsse et al. [18]. This algorithm
has been used to provide users of the LOPES exoskeleton with hip
flexion–extension assistance, and it relies on the use of adaptive
oscillators (AOs), which are mathematical tools introduced by
Righetti et al. [47] that – when coupled with a kernel-based
non-linear filter – can constantly track and provide a zero-delay
estimate of a non-sinusoidal periodic signal (e.g., hip or knee angle
profile during gait), even when it slowly changes its main features
such as frequency and envelope over cycles [18,48,49]. While a
detailed analysis of the mathematical formulation of the algorithm
is available in [18], hereafter we briefly recap its working principle
and how we implemented it on the APO.
Adaptive oscillators are a set of non-linear differential equations with the capacity to synchronize with an input periodic
signal, not by tracking its current value, but rather tracking the signal periodicity characteristics (i.e. amplitude, frequency and lead
phase). When implemented in the dynamic system controller, the

(3) Control unit and safety loop: The control system runs on a realtime controller, a cRIO-9082 (National Instruments, Austin, Texas,
US), endowed with a 1.33 GHz dual-core processor running an NI
real-time operating system and a field programmable gate array
(FPGA) processor Spartan-6 LX150. Both the high- and low-level
layers run at 1 kHz.
The APO control system implements a safety loop that switches
off the actuation when the measured torque is higher than 30 N · m,
or the joint speed is greater than 400° · s−1 . In addition, both the
experimenter and the user can turn off the apparatus by means of
a red, emergency button.
3. Experimental characterization
In this section we describe some experimental sessions carried
out to characterize the performance of the hierarchical control
system depicted in Section 2.3. First, in order to characterize the
closed-loop torque control performance, we analyzed the response
of the exoskeleton system alone, with commanded torque step
and chirp in joint stationary conditions (namely with the joint
velocity being equal to zero), and then we assessed the joint output
impedance in dynamic condition. Second, one healthy subject
volunteered to walk with the APO under two conditions, namely
transparent mode (TM, the desired torque of each joint was set to
zero), and assistive mode (AM, the desired torque of each joint was
calculated based on the above high-level control strategy).
3.1. Characterization of the closed-loop torque control
In this subsection, we will describe the test assessing the
performances of the lower control layer.
(1) Step response: performance of the closed loop controller has
been assessed by recording the responses to different amplitude
steps of desired torque. The moving linkage of the exoskeleton
was driven to a mechanical stop, and pressed against it with an
initial commanded torque value of τdes = −2 N · m. Then several
trials were conducted, with four different signal steps in the range
∆τdes ∈ [−1, −8] N · m superimposed to the initial steady torque;
each step was repeated 15 times for statistical reproducibility
of the experiment. The averaged responses are shown in Fig. 6
and average values of the rise time, settling time and maximum
overshoot are reported in Table 1 for each step amplitude. The
torque control shows a relatively fast underdamped behavior,
which slightly changes with the increase of the step value. Indeed,
the rise time, the settling time and the overshoot increase with the

128

F. Giovacchini et al. / Robotics and Autonomous Systems 73 (2015) 123–134

Fig. 6. Experimental characterization of the step response for different desired step amplitudes. Each graph reports the reference torque (red dotted line) and the averaged
responses over 15 iterations (black line).
Table 1
Average and standard deviation of step response characterization.
Step amplitude
[Nm]

Rise time
[s]

Settling time
[s]

Max. overshoot
[N · m]

1
3
5
8

0.0188 ± 0.0004
0.0271 ± 0.0007
0.0467 ± 0.0006
0.0727 ± 0.0016

0.0630 ± 0.0001
0.1089 ± 0.0003
0.1367 ± 0.0006
0.1761 ± 0.0013

0.2752 ± 0.0028
0.7386 ± 0.0057
1.4925 ± 0.0213
2.5082 ± 0.0517

step amplitude, respectively from 0.018 s to 0.072 s, from 0.06 s to
0.17 s, and from 0.27 N · m to 2.50 N · m. This non-linear behavior
is caused by the saturation of the electrical current driven by the
EPOS2, which limits the maximum acceleration of the DC motor
shaft. Anyhow, performances are satisfactory for our purposes, the
system responding timely and stably to sudden variation.
(2) Chirp response: the frequency response of the torque control
was characterized by recording the exoskeleton joint response
to a linear torque chirp (frequency 0–20 Hz, duration 300 s, and
amplitude 4 N·m). The test was repeated seven times for improving
the estimate of the Bode diagram (amplitude and phase) of the
system G(s) = τ (s)/τdes (s). The resulting amplitude Bode diagram
of the chirp response is reported in Fig. 7(a), and the estimated
−3 dB bandwidth was about 15.5 Hz, which is sufficiently high for
providing assistance to the movement of lower limbs.
(3) Output impedance: in the field of assistive robotics, one of the
more demanding features for a safe and reliable power transfer
towards the user is the transparency of the actuated joint axes with
respect to the wearer natural movement. No hindrance should
be applied by the device while accomplishing a motion task. The
joint output impedance represents a measurement of the level
of transparency of a human interacting with a mechanical device
[43]: mechanical impedance is defined as Z (s) = τ (s)/θ (s) where
θ(s) is the Laplace transform of the applied angular displacement
and τ (s) the Laplace transform of the resulting torque on the
rotational axes. We characterized the output impedance of the APO
under zero-torque mode, i.e. when the orthosis is asked to follow
the intentional movement of the wearer without constraining
the free-motion [43]. Parasitic output impedance was evaluated
by moving manually the linkage, and recording the angular
displacement and the SEA torque. The experimenter displaced
the APO joint with a quasi-sinusoidal flexion–extension motion

of amplitude 20°. The frequency of the movement varied quasilinearly in the range 0.2–3.2 Hz for a recording session of 100 s. Five
iterations were repeated for a more consistent statistical analysis.
Fig. 7(b) shows the profile of the resistive torque felt by the subject
during the task, along with the profile of the flexion–extension
angle. The interaction torque amplitude increases with the motion
frequency, reaching a peak of 5 N · m for 3.2 Hz movement. Fig. 7(c)
shows the Bode plot of the transfer function from the joint angle
to the measured torque. The system shows low output impedance
over the typical bandwidth of the human motion, meaning that if
the user wants to walk while wearing the APO, the exoskeleton
would exert a minimal resistive load, preventing him or her from
additional muscular efforts. Under the action of the zero-torque
control the joint output impedance resulted lowered with respect
to the inherent passive stiffness of the joint torsional spring —
about 100 N·m/rad. Values ranged from about 1 N·m/rad (−40 dB)
for a motion within 0.2 and 1 Hz, to about 35 N · m/rad (−9.11 dB),
at the peak frequency of 3.2 Hz.
3.2. Characterization of the high-level control
In order to evaluate the functionality of the APO system, a
prototypical task of gait assistance was designed and tested on
a healthy volunteer (male, 30 years old, 70 kg). The experiment
was carried out at the premises of Don Carlo Gnocchi Foundation
(Florence, Italy). The healthy subject was requested to walk on a
treadmill for about 2 min at four different velocities (from 2 to
5 km/h) under both the TM and AM modalities. For the AM session
we set the virtual stiffness at either Kv = 15 N · m/rad or Kv =
20 N · m/rad, respectively for the gait velocity being equal or higher
than 2 km/h. The phase lead was set to ∆ ϕ = 0.628 rad.
For each gait velocity and for both AM and TM modalities, we
recorded the joint angle and SEA torque of the left and right legs.
Collected data were segmented into gait cycles: variables of each
stride were in turn resampled between 0 and 100% of the gait cycle.
From the collected variables we derived the joint velocity and SEA
power. It is worth noting that we assumed that the joint angle θJ
is null when the person is standing still with his or her legs fully
stretched, and it is positive when the hip is flexing (namely θ˙J > 0
when the hip joint is flexing; τ > 0 means that the SEA is applying
a flexing torque onto the human hip joint).
Figs. 8 and 9 show the average curves with the standard
deviation contour of the collected/computed variables for the TM

F. Giovacchini et al. / Robotics and Autonomous Systems 73 (2015) 123–134

129

Fig. 7. Experimental characterization of the torque control. (a) Chirp response: amplitude Bode diagram of the transfer function from desired torque to measured torque. (b)
Characterization of the joint output impedance: angular displacement (blue dotted line) and interaction torque (red solid line). (c) Amplitude (normalized with respect to the
value of the inherent compliance of the series elasticity) and phase Bode diagram of the transfer function from angular displacement to interaction torque. (For interpretation
of the references to color in this figure legend, the reader is referred to the web version of this article.)
Table 2
Average and standard deviation of RMSE between desired and measured torque during walking under the TM
and AM conditions. Data are computed for both the right and left hip joints.
Gait speed

2 km/h

3 km/h

4 km/h

5 km/h

Right hip joint

TM RMSE [N m]
AM RMSE [N m]

0.160 ± 0.098
0.245 ± 0.011

0.171 ± 0.044
0.516 ± 0.031

0.286 ± 0.022
0.703 ± 0.114

0.478 ± 0.073
1.152 ± 0.231

Left hip joint

TM RMSE [N m]
AM RMSE [N m]

0.148 ± 0.066
0.223 ± 0.010

0.164 ± 0.027
0.474 ± 0.032

0.235 ± 0.017
0.638 ± 0.057

0.426 ± 0.064
0.902 ± 0.170

and AM sessions respectively. The overall usability of the APO
in a prototypical task of walking was demonstrated by three
experimental evidences. The first point is that the torque control
has a suitable performance also in the case of θ˙J ̸= 0, both in
TM and AM modalities. The RMSE under TM was – in the worst
scenario, namely at 5 km/h – equal to about 0.4 N · m (for both
right and left legs). This result proves that – in addition to a
wide closed-loop bandwidth – the closed-loop control can also
rapidly reject disturbances deriving from the joint movement:
this is a key point that allows the user to wear and walk (under
TM) with the exoskeleton without any additional effort for his/her
musculoskeletal system. The maximum parasitic torque reaches
a negative peak of about −1.5 N · m when the subject walks at
5 km/h, more precisely in correspondence of the swing phase of
both legs, namely when the joint velocity has a positive peak. As
a consequence this is also the case in which the SEA power has a
negative peak, which reaches about −5 W: this is case of maximum
hindering which the APO applies to the movement of the user.
Nevertheless, a negative power peak of −5 W, and an average
negative power of −0.45 W (as shown by Fig. 8 and data reported in
Table 3), is indeed less than 1% of the maximum flexion–extension
torque powered by the hip muscles of a 75 kg healthy subject
during a ground-level walking task at normal cadence [44]. A
similar analysis can be done for the AM condition. Under the AM,
while the gait pattern – in terms of range of motion, joint velocities
and angle profile over the gait cycle – does not differ from the TM
session, data shown in Fig. 9 point out that: (i) the range of the
assistive torque spreads as the gait speed increases; at 5 km/h the
assistive torque over the cycle oscillates between −8 N · m and
10 N · m; (ii) the SEA power is mostly positive and the peak value
– in correspondence of the middle-swing phase – increases from
about 20 to 40 W with the gait speed increasing from 2 to 5 km/h.
In order to quantitatively assess the performance of the torque
control in dynamic conditions (namely θ˙J ̸= 0), for both AM
and TM modalities, we computed the root means square error
(RMSE) between the desired and the actual joint (data from right
and left joints were analyzed separately in order to assess any
potential asymmetrical behavior between the two joints). Results
are summarized in Table 2. For the TM and AM conditions, the
RMSE increased respectively from 0.14 ± 0.06 N · m and 0.22 ±

0.01 N · m, when the gait speed is 2 km/h, to 0.47 ± 0.07 and 1.15 ±
0.23 N · m, when the gait speed is 5 km/h. Results clearly show
how the RMSE between the measured and the desired torque is
higher in AM condition than in TM conditions. This fact is explained
as follows: under TM condition, the RMSE between measured
and desired torque corresponds to the estimate of the parasitic
residual torque exerted by the robot on the limb, when the desired
reference torque value is a null constant. This variability across
stances is due to the low-level controller performances, and to
the non-perfect repetition of the gait steps. In AM utilization, this
background variability is superimposed on the one due to the fact
that the high-level oscillator locks with the current phase of the
gait pattern, and extrapolates a reference torque signal on its basis.
As a consequence, a higher RMSE is returned.
In this case the RMSE between the desired and actual torque
in the worst scenario is about 1 N · m, which is in the range
of 10% of the maximum commanded torque. This is a proof that
the system can successfully implement an assistive strategy: the
controller has the capability of tracking a desired torque reference
variable along the gait cycle. Furthermore, a remarkable point is
that from the analysis of the performance of the actuation units
powering the right and left sides we derive that the APO has a quite
symmetrical behavior. The maximum difference in the RMSE is 11%
and 21% while walking at 5 km/h, respectively under the TM and
AM conditions.
In order to quantitatively assess the mechanical power
transferred from the exoskeleton to the user, for both AM and
TM modalities, we computed the mean value of the SEA power
(data from the right and left joints were analyzed separately in
order to assess any potential asymmetrical behavior between the
two joints). Results are summarized in Table 3 and shown in
Fig. 9. For the TM the mean power is about null, and ranges from
−0.081 ± 0.05 W, when the gait speed is 2 km/h, to −0.36 ± 0.10,
when the gait speed is 5 km/h. On the other hand, for the AM
session the mean power ranges from 4.9 ± 0.29 W, when the
gait speed is 2 km/h, to 10 ± 0.43 W, when the gait speed is 5
km/h. This results prove that the APO – under the action of an
assistive strategy – can actually transfer mechanical power to the
user. It is worth noting that with the increase of the gait velocity
the amount of power (both mean and peak value) applied by the

130

F. Giovacchini et al. / Robotics and Autonomous Systems 73 (2015) 123–134

Fig. 8. Walking with the APO under TM. For each gait speed, the following variables for left and right hip joints are averaged over all strides and plotted against the percentage
of the stride cycle: hip joint angle, hip joint velocity, SEA torque and power. For each graph the average curve (solid line; blue for left and green for right joint) is shown along
with the standard deviation contour. (For interpretation of the references to color in this figure legend, the reader is referred to the web version of this article.)
Table 3
Average and standard deviation of the gait-cycle mean value of the SEA power during walking under the TM and AM
conditions. Data are computed for both the right and left hip joints.
Gait speed

2 km/h

3 km/h

4 km/h

5 km/h

Right hip joint

TM Power [W]
AM Power [W]

−0.088 ± 0.103
5.253 ± 0.228

−0.104 ± 0.098
6.389 ± 0.393

−0.182 ± 0.026
7.913 ± 0.310

−0.445 ± 0.138
10.008 ± 0.438

Left hip joint

TM Power [W]
AM Power [W]

−0.081 ± 0.056
4.902 ± 0.297

−0.096 ± 0.051
5.938 ± 0.471

−0.128 ± 0.015
7.865 ± 0.324

−0.359 ± 0.107
9.490 ± 0.430

APO to the human hips increases. This is simply a consequence
of the fact that with the increase of the gait velocity, there is an
increase of the gait stepping and hip joint velocity during the swing
phase. When moving from the TM to the AM condition, the major
features of the gait pattern are not altered by the applied assistive

torque: the device transfers mechanical power to the human limb
without hindering its movement. Finally, also in this case there is a
quite symmetrical behavior between the right and the left side, the
maximum difference for the SEA mean power in the worst scenario
(5 km/h) being equal to 5%.

F. Giovacchini et al. / Robotics and Autonomous Systems 73 (2015) 123–134

131

Fig. 9. Walking with the APO under AM. For each gait speed, the following variables for left and right hip joints are averaged over all strides and plotted against the percentage
of the stride cycle: hip joint angle, hip joint velocity, SEA torque and power. For each graph the average curve (solid line; blue for left and green for right joint) is shown along
with the standard deviation contour. (For interpretation of the references to color in this figure legend, the reader is referred to the web version of this article.)

4. Discussion
The experiments presented in the previous section aimed
at assessing our mechatronic system in static, dynamic and
interacting conditions. More specifically, we addressed: (1) the
overall system usability as a wearable device physically interfacing
with a human subject; (2) the dynamic performance of the lowlevel torque control; (3) the overall usability of the APO in a
prototypical task of walking with a healthy subject wearing the
device in both TM and AM modalities.
(1) Physical human–robot interface: the orthotic shells coupled
with the subject provided a comfortable support and the large
interaction area distributed over five contact zones the pressure
on user’s trunk and thighs. Position and extent of these contact
areas actually prevent the physical coupling from being unstable,

especially when the actuators deliver high torques. If we compare
the design with the ones of similar devices (e.g., the HONDA hip
support, hip exoskeleton by Ferris et al. [39] and SERKA [35]) we
can notice how the attachment points are much smaller, and thus
can easily become unstable: a typical problem in exoskeletons is
that the motion conveyed from the robot actuated joints to the
user limbs goes lost in the slippage of the interaction cuffs, which
may tilt around the limb bone and lead to shear stresses and
high concentrated loads if they are too thin. In our APO, the rigid
structure of the linkages and the soft and adjustable orthotic shells
ensures a correct transmission of relatively high assistive torque
values (namely in the range of up to ±10 N · m) over a wide range of
gait velocity: indeed, during the walking task – under AM condition
– the healthy volunteer did not report any discomfort from both
wearing the device and mechanically interacting with it.

132

F. Giovacchini et al. / Robotics and Autonomous Systems 73 (2015) 123–134

Several passive and lockable DoFs, designed to adjust frame
dimensions and linkages positions as well as to align the
anatomical rotational axes with the actuated ones, allow to cover
a wide range of user’s sizes. The resulting structure is however
light, with a total weight of 4.2 kg: in future developments of the
device, since control electronics and battery pack will be on-board,
we expect the global weight to increase up to 5–6 kg. This should
not represent a limitation for the device: indeed, as demonstrated
by Abe et al. in [50], carrying a 6 kg load on the lower part of the
back does not significantly affect the human energy expenditure
during a task of ground-level walking.
From the above analysis we derive – as a future perspective
for our research activities – the need of experimentally assessing
the actual loading effect onto the human body which derives from
wearing and walking with the APO (both under TM and AM): this
will be done by carrying out measurements of energy consumption
by means of an indirect calorimeter.
(2) Low-level torque control: the experimental characterization of
the low-level control pointed out that the proposed implementation for the SEA and its control system have a suitable dynamic
performance to provide an assistive torque with null-to-minimum
output impedance.
The step-response experiments pointed out that the tracking
capabilities of the device actuator are fast and prompt enough, this
feature being mainly a property of the chosen motors and their
PID tuning. The chirp response analysis stressed out that the lowlevel controller leads to a −3 dB control bandwidth of 15.5 Hz, thus
broadly enclosing the typical frequencies of human gait. This result
is comparable with those attained with another lower-limb device,
endowing SEAs and an adaptive-oscillator-based controller, the
LOPES platform [51]: the main innovation in this work is that
we were able to reach the same performances with a light-weight
and portable device, while the LOPES is structurally sustained by
a treadmill. Finally, within the 0.2–3.2 Hz frequency bandwidth,
in zero-torque mode we measured values of parasitic torque and
residual stiffness relatively low and comparable with the ones
reported in state-of-the-art robots [51].
(3) Usability for assistive strategy: the usability of the system as an
assistive device has been explored by analyzing and comparing
the TM and AM experimental session results (Figs. 8 and 9
respectively): in TM, we assessed the capability of the APO to
promptly reject disturbances due to the variability of joint motion,
with a peak of resistive torque of 0.4 N · m, while in AM we
observed how the system was able to provide a high amount of net
positive power, with minimal differences between the joint angle
motion profile between the TM and AM conditions (apart from the
increased variability over different strides), this being a proof that
the APO in AM mode does not affect the natural gait cadence.
The reader should notice that in this paper the efficacy of
the device in reducing the user effort has been not directly
demonstrated, although the selected algorithm showed capability
to reduce the whole-body metabolic consumption of the wearer
receiving assistance from the LOPES treadmill-based rehabilitation
platform [18]. Indeed, no sensors for measuring physical effort,
e.g. EMG electrodes to monitor the muscular activity of the wearer
or pressure sensor to record the interaction between the user and
the orthotic shells, have been used in the experimental session.
Nevertheless, Fig. 9 showed a net positive power flowing through
the SEA units: this power is ultimately conveyed to the user’s
thigh, since the exoskeleton moving linkage is not exchanging
actions with any other system. It is reasonable to admit that the
exoskeleton power difference between Figs. 8 and 9 corresponds
to the energy the wearer saved, if the power consumption of the
global system (user plus exoskeleton) in achieving the walking gait
is considered constant between TM and AM. This latter assumption
is however not ensured, since a dynamic interaction between

the orthosis and the wearer may affect the way the walking is
approached (changing its RoM and muscular synergies), but the
reported data in Fig. 9 are however indicators of the original device
intent, i.e. to supply power in order to assist the gait.
5. Conclusions
In this paper, we presented a novel light-weight bilateral active
pelvis exoskeleton for hip flexion–extension assistance. The design
of APO addressed main innovative features: a light-weight carbonfiber structure (a total weight of 4.2 kg) with orthotic shells at the
human–robot interface and several passive DoFs for adjustment;
a compact SEA with a customized torsional spring that ensures to
apply an assistive torque with minimum output impedance. These
features satisfy important design requirements for an assistive
device: (i) a wide and comfortable human–robot physical interface
capable to transmit the assistive torque; (ii) a safe and effective
actuation and control systems which avoid additional effort during
walking both in TM and AM.
In this paper, the design and development of the system has
been described in detail, in association with experimental characterization performed to assess its effectiveness in a prototypical gait-assistance scenario. Future works will focus on three main
strands. First, we will carry out a more detailed characterization
of the loading effect of APO on the human subject by measuring
the user energy expenditure while walking. Second, we will validate the current APO system in a large study with elderly people
affected by gait impairment in order to demonstrate the system
usability in reducing their effort in tasks of ground-level walking.
Finally, we will design and develop an updated version of APO with
on-board electronics and battery, and with a better placement of
the actuation units which will favor the natural swing of the arms
during walking.
Finally, it has been shown how the device applied in TM a nearzero torque to the thigh linkage, independently on the walking
phase, while in AM it supplied power to foster the gait. In which
relation this latter exoskeleton output power is with the user’s
effort reduction is an open question, and will be the object of future
works: the present study only aimed at explaining and validating
the orthotic device and its simple – but effective – gait-adaptive
control method.
Acknowledgments
This work was supported in part by the EU within the
CYBERLEGs project (FP7-ICT-2011-2.1 Grant Agreement #287894),
by Fondazione Pisa within the IUVO project (prog. 154/11) and
Regione Toscana under the Health Regional Programme 2009
within the EARLYREHAB Project.
References
[1] Healthy ageing: keystone for a sustainable Europe, http://ec.europa.eu/
health7ph_information/indicators, 2007.
[2] H. Stolze, S. Klebe, C. Baecker, C. Zechlin, L. Friege, S. Pohle, G. Deuschl,
Prevalence of gait disorders in hospitalized neurological patients, Mov.
Disorders 20 (1) (2005) 89–94.
[3] A.H. Snijders, B.P. van de Warrenburg, N. Giladi, B.R. Bloem, Neurological gait
disorders in elderly people: clinical approach and classification, The Lancet
Neurol. 6 (1) (2007) 63–74.
[4] J. Verghese, A. LeValley, C.B. Hall, M.J. Katz, A.F. Ambrose, R.B. Lipton,
Epidemiology of gait disorders in community-residing older adults, J. Am.
Geriatr. Soc. 54 (2) (2006) 255–261.
[5] R.S. Wilson, J.A. Schneider, L.A. Beckett, D.A. Evans, D.A. Bennett, Progression
of gait disorder and rigidity and risk of death in older persons, Neurology 58
(12) (2002) 1815–1819.
[6] J.A. Ashton-Miller, Age-associated changes in the biomechanics of gait and
gait-related falls in older adults, in: J.M. Hausdorff, N.B. Alexander (Eds.), Gait
Disorders: Evaluation and Management, Taylor & Francis, Boca Raton, 2005,
pp. 63–100.

F. Giovacchini et al. / Robotics and Autonomous Systems 73 (2015) 123–134
[7] R. Burge, B. Dawson-Hughes, D.H. Solomon, J.B. Wong, A. King, A. Tosteson,
Incidence and economic burden of osteoporosis-related fractures in the United
States, 2005–2025, J. Bone Miner. Res. 22 (3) (2007) 465–475.
[8] B.R. Bloem, J. Haan, A.M. Lagaay, W. van Beek, A.R. Wintzen, R.A. Roos,
Investigation of gait in elderly subjects over 88 years of age, J. Geriatr.
Psychiatry Neurol. 5 (2) (1992) 78–84.
[9] T.D. Fife, R.W. Baloh, Disequilibrium of unknown cause in older people, Ann.
Neurol. 34 (5) (1993) 694–702.
[10] G.T. Whitman, T. Tang, A. Lin, R.W. Baloh, A prospective study of cerebral white
matter abnormalities in older people with gait dysfunction, Neurology 57 (6)
(2001) 990–994.
[11] R.R. Benson, C.R.G. Guttmann, X. Wei, S.K. Warfield, C. Hall, J.A. Schmidt, R.
Kikinis, L.I. Wolfson, Older people with impaired mobility have specific loci of
periventricular abnormality on MRI, Neurology 58 (1) (2002) 48–55.
[12] R.W. Baloh, S.H. Ying, K.M. Jacobson, A longitudinal study of gait and balance
dysfunction in normal older people, Arch. Neurol. 60 (6) (2003) 835–839.
[13] L. Wolfson, X. Wei, C.B. Hall, V. Panzer, D. Wakefield, R.R. Benson, J.A. Schmidt,
S.K. Warfield, C.R.G. Guttmann, Accrual of MRI white matter abnormalities in
elderly with normal and impaired mobility, J. Neurol. Sci. 232 (1) (2005) 23–27.
[14] A. Kesler, L. Gregory, H. Talia, G. Leor, G. Nir, H. Jeffrey, Shedding light on
walking in the dark: the effects of reduced lighting on the gait of older adults
with a higher-level gait disorder and controls, J. Neuroeng. Rehabil. 2 (2005)
27.
[15] K.A. Kerber, G.P. Ishiyama, R.W. Baloh, A longitudinal study of oculomotor
function in normal older people, Neurobiol. Aging 27 (9) (2006) 1346–1353.
[16] J.L. Pons, Rehabilitation exoskeletal robotics. The promise of an emerging field,
IEEE Eng. Med. Biol. Mag. 29 (3) (2010) 57–63.
[17] R. Ronsse, N. Vitiello, T. Lenzi, J. van den Kieboom, M.C. Carrozza, A.J. Ijspeert,
Human–robot synchrony: flexible assistance using adaptive oscillators, IEEE
Trans. Biomed. Eng. 58 (4) (2011) 1001–1012.
[18] R. Ronsse, T. Lenzi, N. Vitiello, B. Koopman, E. van Asseldonk, S.M.M. De Rossi, J.
van den Kieboom, H. van der Kooij, M.C. Carrozza, A.J. Ijspeert, Oscillator-based
assistance of cyclical movements: model-based and model-free approaches,
Med. Biol. Eng. Comput. 49 (10) (2011) 1173–1185.
[19] A.M. Dollar, H. Herr, Lower extremity exoskeletons and active orthoses:
challenges and state-of-the-art, IEEE Trans. Robot. 24 (1) (2008) 144–158.
[20] A. Schiele, F.C. van der Helm, Kinematic design to improve ergonomics in
human machine interaction, IEEE Trans. Neural Syst. Rehabil. Eng 14 (4) (2006)
456–469.
[21] A.H.A. Stienen, E.E.G. Hekman, F.C.T. van der Helm, H. van der Kooij,
Self-aligning exoskeleton axes through decoupling of joint rotations and
translations, IEEE Trans. Robot. 25 (3) (2009) 628–633.
[22] E. Rocon, J.M. Belda-Lois, A.F. Ruiz, M. Manto, J.C. Moreno, J.L. Pons, Design and
validation of a rehabilitation robotic exoskeleton for tremor assessment and
suppression, IEEE Trans. Neural Syst. Rehabil. Eng. 15 (3) (2007) 367–378.
[23] G.A. Pratt, M.M. Williamson, Series elastic actuators, in: Proceedings IEEE/RSJ
International Conference on Intelligent Robots and Systems. Human Robot
Interaction and Cooperative Robots, vol. 1, Aug. 1995, pp. 399–406.
[24] S.K. Banala, S.H. Kim, S.K. Agrawal, J.P. Scholz, Robot assisted gait training with
active leg exoskeleton (ALEX), IEEE Trans. Neural Syst. Rehabil. Eng. 17 (1)
(2009) 2–8.
[25] G.S. Sawicki, K.E. Gordon, D.P. Ferris, Powered Lower limb orthoses:
applications in motor adaptation and rehabilitation, in: 9th International
Conference on Rehabilitation Robotics, Jun. 2005, pp. 206–211.
[26] P. Beyl, M. Van Damme, R. Van Ham, B. Vanderborght, D. Lefeber, Design
and control of a lower limb exoskeleton for robot-assisted gait training, Appl.
Bionics Biomech 6 (2) (2009) 229–243.
[27] S. Jezernik, G. Colombo, T. Keller, H. Frueh, M. Morari, Robotic orthosis
lokomat: a rehabilitation and research tool, Neuromodulation 6 (2) (2003)
108–115.
[28] J.F. Veneman, R. Kruidhof, E.E.G. Hekman, R. Ekkelenkamp, E.H.F. Van
Asseldonk, H. van der Kooij, Design and evaluation of the LOPES exoskeleton
robot for interactive gait rehabilitation, IEEE Trans. Neural Syst. Rehabil. Eng.
15 (3) (2007) 379–386.
[29] R.J. Farris, H.A. Quintero, M. Goldfarb, Preliminary evaluation of a powered
lower limb orthosis to aid walking in paraplegic individuals, IEEE Trans. Neural
Syst. Rehabil. Eng. 19 (6) (2011) 652–659.
[30] H. Kawamoto, T. Hayashi, T. Sakurai, K. Eguchi, Y. Sankai, Development of
single leg version of HAL for hemiplegia, in: Conf. Proc. IEEE Eng. Med. Biol.
Soc., vol. 2009, Jan. 2009, pp. 5038–5043.
[31] K. Kong, D. Jeon, Design and control of an exoskeleton for the elderly and
patients, IEEE/ASME Trans. Mechatronics 11 (4) (2006) 428–432.
[32] S. Krut, M. Benoit, E. Dombre, F. Pierrot, MoonWalker, a lower limb exoskeleton
able to sustain bodyweight using a passive force balancer, in: Proceedings
IEEE International Conference on Robotics and Automation, May 2010,
pp. 2215–2220.
[33] H. Kazerooni, R. Steger, The Berkeley lower extremity exoskeleton, J. Dyn. Syst.,
Meas. Control 128 (1) (2006) 14–25.
[34] C.J. Walsh, K. Pasch, H. Herr, An autonomous, underactuated exoskeleton for
load-carrying augmentation, in: Proc. IEEE/RSJ Int. Conf. Intell. Robots Syst.
(IROS), Beijing, China, 2006, pp. 1410–1415.
[35] J.S. Sulzer, R.A. Roiz, M.A. Peshkin, J.L. Patton, A highly backdrivable,
lightweight knee actuator for investigating gait in stroke, IEEE Trans. Robot.
25 (3) (2009) 539–548.
[36] J. Hitt, A.M. Oymagil, T. Sugar, K. Hollander, A. Boehler, J. Fleeger, Dynamically
Controlled Ankle–Foot Orthosis (DCO) with regenerative kinetics: incrementally attaining user portability, in: Proceedings IEEE International Conference
on Robotics and Automation, Apr 2007, pp. 1541–1546.

133

[37] J.A. Blaya, H. Herr, Adaptive control of a variable-impedance ankle–foot
orthosis to assist drop-foot gait, IEEE Trans. Neural Syst. Rehabil. Eng. 12 (1)
(2004) 24–31.
[38] B.G. do Nascimento, C.B.S. Vimieiro, D.A.P. Nagem, M. Pinotti, Hip orthosis
powered by pneumatic artificial muscle: voluntary activation in absence of
myoelectrical signal, Artif. Organs 32 (4) (2008) 317–322.
[39] D.P. Ferris, C.L. Lewis, Robotic lower limb exoskeletons using proportional
myoelectric control, in: Conf. Proc. IEEE Eng. Med. Biol. Soc., vol. 2009, Jan.
2009, pp. 2119–2124.
[40] F. Giovacchini, M. Fantozzi, M. Peroni, M. Moisé, M. Cempini, M. Cortese,
D. Lefeber, M.C. Carrozza, N. Vitiello, A light-weight exoskeleton for hip
flexion-extension assistance, in: International Congress on Neurotechnology.
Electronics and Informatics, Sept. 2013, pp. 194–198.
[41] N. Vitiello, T. Lenzi, S. Roccella, S.M.M. De Rossi, E. Cattin, F. Giovacchini, F.
Vecchi, M.C. Carrozza, NEUROExos: a powered elbow exoskeleton for physical
rehabilitation, IEEE Trans. Robot. 29 (1) (2013) 220–235.
[42] J.F. Veneman, A series elastic- and Bowden-cable-based actuation system for
use as torque actuator in exoskeleton-type robots, Int. J. Robot. Res. 25 (3)
(2006) 261–281.
[43] M. Zinn, O. Khatib, B. Roth, A new actuation approach for human friendly
robot design, in: Proceedings IEEE International Conference on Robotics and
Automation, vol. 1, Vol.1, Apr. 2004, pp. 249–254.
[44] D.A. Winter, Biomechanics and Motor Control of Human Movement, John
Wiley & Sons, 2009, p. 370.
[45] C.J. Walsh, K. Endo, H. Herr, A quasi-passive legacy exoskeleton for loadcarrying augmentation, Int. J. Hum. Robot. 4 (3) (2007) 487–506.
[46] M. Cempini, F. Giovacchini, N. Vitiello, M. Cortese, M. Moisé, F. Posteraro,
M.C. Carrozza, NEUROExos: a powered elbow orthosis for post-stroke early
neurorehabilitation, in: Conf. Proc. IEEE Eng. Med. Biol. Soc., vol. 2013, Jan.
2013, pp. 342–345.
[47] L. Righetti, J. Buchli, A.J. Ijspeert, Dynamic Hebbian learning in adaptive
frequency oscillators, Phys. D 216 (2) (2006) 269–281.
[48] R. Ronsse, S.M.M. De Rossi, N. Vitiello, T. Lenzi, M.C. Carrozza, A.J. Ijspeert,
Real-time estimate of velocity and acceleration of quasi-periodic signals using
adaptive oscillators, IEEE Trans. Robot. 29 (3) (2013) 783–791.
[49] R. Ronsse, B. Koopman, N. Vitiello, T. Lenzi, S.M.M. De Rossi, J. van den Kieboom,
E. van Asseldonk, M.C. Carrozza, H. van der Kooij, A.J. Ijspeert, Oscillator-based
walking assistance: a model-free approach, in: IEEE Int. Conf. Rehabil. Robot.,
Jan. 2011, pp. 597–5352.
[50] D. Abe, K. Yanagawa, S. Niihata, Effects of load carriage, load position, and
walking speed on energy cost of walking, Appl. Ergon. 35 (4) (2004) 329–335.
[51] H. Vallery, R. Ekkelenkamp, H. van der Kooij, M. Buss, Passive and accurate
torque control of series elastic actuators, in: IEEE/RSJ International Conference
on Intelligent Robots and Systems, Nov. 2007, pp. 3534–3538.

Francesco Giovacchini was born in Pisa, Italy, in 1980. He
received his B.Sc. in Mechanical Engineering and his M.Sc.
in Mechanical Engineering from the University of Pisa in
2003 and in 2006 respectively. Starting from 2007 he is
a research assistant at The BioRobotics Institute (ex ARTS
Lab) of Scuola Superiore Sant’Anna. His research interests
are in the fields of biomechatronics with particular
interests in robotic platforms and wearable devices for
rehabilitation and assistance (i.e. exoskeleton for the hand
and for the upper and lower limbs).
Federica Vannetti received the M.Sc. degree in Biomedical
Engineering in 2005 and the Ph.D. in Mechanical Design in
2010, from University of Florence, Italy. In 2009–2010 she
has been a Post-Doctoral fellow at the Laboratory of Industrial Bioengineering, University of Florence, Italy, working on the infrared thermography applied to ophthalmology. Her research interest is in the field of gait analysis by
using motion capture, markerless system, inertial sensor
and EMG signals; furthermore she is involved in some research work about metabolic consumption in healthy and
pathological subjects. She has been working at Don Gnocchi Foundation as a researcher since 2010.
Matteo Fantozzi was born in Viareggio, Italy, in 1981. He
received his B.Sc. in Aerospace Engineering and his M.Sc.
in Aerospace Engineering in 2006 and 2011 respectively.
In 2007 he worked at Fosber S.p.a. (Monsagrati, Italy) –
Company producer of machines for the corrugated paper
sector – as a mechanical engineer. From November 2011 to
March 2012 he worked for Velan ABV S.p.a. (Lucca, Italy),
a Company producer of valves and actuation systems
for the oil&gas sector. Starting from April 2012 he is a
research assistant at The BioRobotics Institute of Scuola
Superiore Sant’Anna. His research interests are in the field
of mechanics, especially in innovative mechanical solutions, and in the field of space
propulsion with particular interests in electric propulsion (plasma thrusters).

134

F. Giovacchini et al. / Robotics and Autonomous Systems 73 (2015) 123–134

Marco Cempini received the M.Sc. degree in aeronautical
engineering (cum laude) both from the University of Pisa,
Italy and from Scuola Superiore Sant’Anna, Pisa, Italy in
2010. In 2014 he received the Ph.D. in Bio-Robotics from
The BioRobotics Institute of Scuola Superiore Sant’Anna,
where he is currently a Post-Doctoral fellow within the
Wearable Robotics laboratory. He spent 9 months as
Visiting Researcher at the Robotics and Mechatronics
Laboratory of University of Twente (Enschede, NL).
He participated in several EU-funded research projects,
related to development of rehabilitation and assistive
robotic devices (CYBERLEGs, WAY, EVRYON), with mayor roles in the mechatronic
development. His research interests include mechanical design, modeling and
development of wearable robots and exoskeletons for upper limb, lower limb and
hand assistance. From 2014 Dr. Cempini is member of ASME, IEEE, RAS and EMBS
scientific societies. In 2008, he participated the first ESA Lunar Robotics Challenge
as a master student. In the last three years he served as Referee for 18 ISI journal
papers and several peer-reviewed conferences paper.
Mario Cortese received his M.Sc. in Electronic Engineering (cum laude) in 2011. He is currently a Ph.D. student
in Biorobotics at The BioRobotics Institute, Scuola Superiore Sant’Anna, Pisa, Italy. His current research interest includes electronic design for wearable robotics, developing
of human–robot interfaces and control strategies for upper
and lower limb rehabilitation robots.

Andrea Parri received the M.Sc. degree in Biomedical
Engineering (cum laude) from University of Pisa, Italy,
in 2014. He is currently a Post-Graduate fellow at The
BioRobotics Institute, Scuola Superiore Sant’Anna, Pisa,
Italy. His major research interest is in the development of
adaptive assistive strategies for wearable robots.

Tingfang Yan is currently a Ph.D. student of The Biorobotics
Institute, Scuola Superiore Sant’Anna, Pisa, Italy. She received her B. Sc. and M.Sc. degree in Control Science and
Engineering from Shandong University, China in 2011 and
2014 respectively. Her main research interests include the
development of wearable robotic devices for human motion assistance and rehabilitation.

Dirk Lefeber received the degree in Study of Civil
Engineering at the Vrije Universiteit Brussel and a Ph.D.
in Applied Sciences, Vrije Universiteit Brussel, in 1986.
Currently he is a professor at the Dept. of Mechanical
Engineering and the head of the Robotics and Multibody
Mechanics Research Group, Vrije Universiteit Brussel.
His research interests are new actuators with adaptable
compliance, dynamically balanced robots, robot assistants,
rehabilitation robotics and multibody dynamics.

Nicola Vitiello received the M.Sc. degree in Biomedical
Engineering (cum laude) from the University of Pisa,
Italy, in 2006, and from Scuola Superiore Sant’Anna,
Pisa, Italy, in 2007. He also received the Ph.D. degree
in Biorobotics from the Scuola Superiore Sant’Anna, Pisa,
Italy, in 2010. He is currently an Assistant Professor with
The BioRobotics Institute, Scuola Superiore Sant’Anna.
He is the author or co-author of 21 ISI/Scopus papers
and 30 peer-review conference proceedings papers. He
has served as the Scientific Secretary of the EU FP7
CA-RoboCom project, and he is currently the Project
Coordinator of: the EU FP7 CYBERLEGs Project, the IUVO Project funded by
Fondazione Pisa, and the EARLYREHAB Project funded by Regione Toscana. His main
research interests include the development of wearable robotic devices for human
motion assistance and rehabilitation and of robotic platforms for neuroscientific
investigations.

