Robotics and Autonomous Systems 73 (2015) 102–110

Contents lists available at ScienceDirect

Robotics and Autonomous Systems
journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/robot

Soft exosuit for hip assistance
Alan T. Asbeck, Kai Schmidt, Conor J. Walsh ∗
Biodesign Lab, School of Engineering and Applied Sciences, Harvard University, Cambridge, MA, USA
The Wyss Institute for Biologically-Inspired Engineering, Cambridge, MA, USA

highlights
• Soft exosuit to actuate hip extension.
• Applies 30% of thenominal biological torques during walking at 1.25 m/s.
• New spooled-webbing actuator.

article

info

Article history:
Available online 16 October 2014
Keywords:
Exosuit
Wearable robotics
Walking assistance

abstract
Exoskeletons comprised of rigid load-bearing structures have been developed for many years, but a new
paradigm is to create ‘‘exosuits’’ that apply tensile forces to the body using textiles and utilize the body’s
skeletal structure to support compressive forces. Exosuits are intended to augment the musculature by
providing small to moderate levels of assistance at appropriate times in the walking cycle. They have a
number of substantial benefits: with their fabric construction, exosuits eliminate problems of needing to
align a rigid frame precisely with the biological joints and their inertia can be extremely low. In this paper,
we present a fully portable hip-assistance exosuit that uses a backpack frame to attach to the torso, onto
which is mounted a spooled-webbing actuator that connects to the back of the users thigh. The actuators,
powered by a geared brushless motor connected to a spool via a timing belt, wind up seat-belt webbing
onto the spool so that a large travel is possible with a simple, compact mechanism. Designed to be worn
over the clothing, the webbing creates a large moment arm around the hip that provides torques in the
sagittal plane of up to 30% of the nominal biological torques for level-ground walking. Due to its soft
design, the system does not restrict the motion of the hip in the ab- and adduction directions or rotation
about the leg axis. Here we present the design of the system along with some initial measurements of the
system in use during walking on level ground at 1.25 m/s, where it creates a force of up to 150 N on the
thigh, equivalent to a torque of 20.5 Nm to assist hip extension.
© 2014 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

1. Introduction
A large number of lower limb exoskeletons have been developed over the years, usually with the purpose of assisting or augmenting human walking. For individuals needing to carry heavy
loads such as soldiers or recreational backpackers, the promise of
a mechanical assist is welcoming, potentially reducing muscle fatigue, metabolic expenditure, or injury rates. For individuals needing assistance with walking such as the elderly or paraplegic, or
patients requiring gait rehabilitation, such devices could potentially restore walking function.

∗ Corresponding author at: Biodesign Lab, School of Engineering and Applied
Sciences, Harvard University, Cambridge, MA, USA.
E-mail addresses: aasbeck@gmail.com (A.T. Asbeck),
kschmidt@seas.harvard.edu (K. Schmidt), walsh@seas.harvard.edu (C.J. Walsh).
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.robot.2014.09.025
0921-8890/© 2014 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

Many previous exoskeletons have comprised of rigid loadbearing structures, designed to transmit forces to the ground
while tracking or applying torques to the wearer’s joints at points
along the structure. Some of these use the exoskeleton to support
the weight of a hiker’s backpack [1–4], while others support a
paraplegic’s bodyweight [5–10].
An alternative approach that has been applied to assist walking
is to apply torques to the user’s joints in parallel with the musculature, but without transmitting a load to ground. In particular,
devices have been constructed to augment the strength of the hip
and knee in healthy individuals [11,12]. Many other such devices
are powered orthoses [13–15] that are designed to support disabled individuals by providing assistance at both the hip and knee
to compensate for reduced muscle strength. These systems are also
rigid, and may require an ankle–foot orthosis to be used with them
to provide stability for the ankle joint and prevent migration of the

A.T. Asbeck et al. / Robotics and Autonomous Systems 73 (2015) 102–110

rigid components that can often have significant weight. Two previous devices for assisting the hip in flexion used pneumatic actuators [16–18] along with rigid plastic orthoses to secure to the leg
and pelvis such that a pin joint was approximately colocated with
the hip. Several other devices have been made to provide assistance
to the ankle alone, both for plantarflexion and dorsiflexion [19,20].
These units offer the potential to increase power generation capability at the ankle to support forward propulsion in addition to
ensuring sufficient toe clearance from the ground during swing.
A more recent rigid exoskeleton is the Honda Walking Assist
Device with Stride Management System [21,22], which actuates
the hip joint in both flexion and extension. This device consists of
a hybrid soft–rigid waist belt and struts that extend partially down
the thigh, where they attach with narrow straps. It is powered by
a motor approximately colocated with the wearers hip joint in the
sagittal plane and includes a passive joint just above the motor to
permit small amount of hip ab-/adduction. It functions differently
from the previously-discussed examples, in that it only applies
small forces and serves primarily to regulate the cadence of the
wearer. Humans are known to walk most efficiently at a certain
cadence (steps per minute) for a given forward velocity, and the
Honda system applies small torques to the hips to entice the user
into walking at that cadence.
As an alternative to rigid exoskeletons, a new paradigm is to create ‘‘exosuits’’ that are comprised of fabrics and utilize the body’s
skeletal structure to support compressive forces. Exosuits are used
to augment the musculature by providing small amounts of assistance at crucial times in the walking cycle, as opposed to being
able to apply large torques or support significant weight. These systems have a number of substantial benefits: with their fabric construction, exosuits eliminate problems of needing to align a rigid
frame precisely with the biological joints and their inertia can be
extremely low. These two features virtually eliminate resistance
to motion, thus permitting close to natural kinematics. Furthermore, exosuits can be light and sleek, permitting them to be worn
constantly; thus enabling rehabilitation or strength augmentation
to occur for longer periods of time throughout the day. However,
while these systems do offer potential benefits over rigid exoskeletons, there are limitations related to controllability and maximum
applied force and thus much research remains to characterize them
and understand their capabilities.
While the concept of an exosuit is relatively new, a number of
designs have already been developed. Wehner et al. [23] created a
pneumatically-powered system that assists ankle plantarflexion,
and uses a garment of cloth and webbing to secure to the legs,
waist, and shoulders. Asbeck et al. [24] developed a Bowden-cabledriven biologically inspired exosuit that assists both ankle plantarflexion and hip flexion with a single actuator for each leg. This
is achieved with a multi-articular exosuit architecture that transmits forces from the waist and thigh through the knee and to the
back of the calf, where it connects to the heel via the Bowden cable.
Kawamura et al. [25] made a pneumatically-powered exosuit to assist hip flexion, with the device attaching to the wearer with a wide
waist belt and a brace that crosses the knee. In addition to assisting
walking, several other exosuits have been developed that support
the back and torso while the wearer is lifting heavy loads [26–28].
The system described in this paper is a new example of a soft
exosuit that uses the body’s bone structure to support compressive
forces and does not provide kinematic restrictions to the joints. The
design assists hip extension, and is shown in Fig. 1.
In this paper, we focus on the design of the exosuit. In the following sections, we present an overview of the system, model how
it applies torques to the body, and compute the requirements for
the actuators. We describe and perform analysis for a new spooledwebbing actuator. We also present preliminary measurements of
the system in use during walking on level ground, demonstrating
its functionality.

103

Fig. 1. Top, exosuit to assist hip extension described in this paper. Two actuator
units are mounted on a backpack frame, and connect to cloth thigh braces with
webbing. Bottom, overview of device operation. Starting at 90% in the gait cycle,
which extends from one heelstrike to the next, the actuator units retract the
webbing. This produces a force on the thigh that increases until 6% in the gait cycle.
The actuator units then spool out the webbing so the force decreases, reaching zero
at 20% in the gait cycle. At other times in the gait cycle, the webbing is slack so that
no force is applied to the leg.

2. System overview
Our design (Fig. 1) utilizes a backpack frame to attach to the
torso, and uses geared motors to retract webbing ribbon connected
to a thigh brace on each leg. The actuators wind up the webbing
ribbon onto a spool, which permits large (>25 cm) travel with a
simple mechanism. The bottom of Fig. 1 shows how the device
functions during the walking cycle. The actuators retract the
webbing just before heelstrike, which in conjunction with the leg’s
motion creates forces pulling the thigh back. The force peaks just
after heelstrike, concurrent with the wearer extending their hip to
support themselves on the newly-planted leg. The actuators then
extend the webbing again, so that there is no force in the webbing
for the majority of the gait cycle.
This actuation scheme is unique in that the ribbon is wound on
top of itself, increasing the spool diameter as the ribbon retracts.
Mechanisms that wind or unwind a thin ribbon from a spool with
an actuator have been used in several applications previously,
including retracting seat belts, reading audio and video magnetic
tapes, mopping floors, and deploying drip system tubing [29–32].

104

A.T. Asbeck et al. / Robotics and Autonomous Systems 73 (2015) 102–110

For comparison, many devices wind up a thin cable around a spool,
but the cable typically travels down the length of the spool as it
winds, instead of solely winding on top of itself as it does in our
actuators. We use webbing instead of a thin cable so the device is
comfortable if the wearer is seated or if their leg is at large (>90°)
angles in flexion. In these scenarios, a narrow cable would dig into
the body, while the 2′′ wide webbing will press in only a small
amount due to its much larger contact area. The webbing further
forms a wide attachment to the thigh brace, helping distribute
forces around the thigh.
The webbing path between the backpack and thigh brace creates a large moment arm around the hip, providing torques in the
sagittal plane of up to 30% of the nominal biological hip torques
for level-ground walking. A key feature of this soft design is that it
does not restrict the motion of the hip in the ab- and adduction directions or in rotation about the leg axis. The webbing also permits
the force to be measured inside the actuator unit, since it extends
directly from it to the thigh attachment. Measuring forces internally permits the unit to be compact and robust, with no wiring
or sensors outside of the actuation units. The system also includes
two footswitches that are used to estimate the wearer’s cadence
and phase through gait.
The prototype device is capable of applying forces to the leg
of up to 150 N at walking speeds up to 1.79 m/s (4 mph). The
device utilizes the backpack frame to transmit torques to the torso,
pushing forward and downward on the lower back with forces up
to 188 N and pulling back on the shoulders with forces up to 50 N.
The entire device weighs 7.57 kg including batteries to last for 2.8 h
of use. The bulk of the weight is on the torso, with each thigh brace
providing minimal inertia to the leg with a weight of 0.17 kg.
3. Calculations
In this section we present a simple model of the system and
perform calculations to determine the necessary velocity of the
ribbon at the motor in order for the actuators to achieve sufficient
forces necessary to apply a scaled version of the nominal hip
moment during walking on level ground at 1.43 m/s (3.2 mph). It
should be noted that these values depend on the compliance of the
body and suit in addition to the leg’s motion.
3.1. System modeling
A diagram of the system is shown in Fig. 2. This shows the backpack frame worn on the user’s torso and the webbing ribbon extending downward to the thigh brace. Within the leg, a number of
springs are shown, representing the compliance of the tissue between the surface of the leg and the underlying bone. The muscle,
fat, and other tissue in the leg will compress as they transfer forces
to the femur bone, which is the only rigid component in the leg.
Additional springs are shown at the waist and the shoulder, where
the body also has some compliance. We model the total effective
stiffness of all of these locations as they interact with the system together as the stiffness kbody . The compliance of the ribbon itself can
be ignored since it is comparatively inextensible, with a stiffness of
600,000 N/m for a 25 cm length (Young’s modulus = 2.41 GPa).
The top right of the diagram in Fig. 2 shows a geometric model of
the wearer’s leg and how the exosuit attaches to it. The pivot point
of the hip in the sagittal plane is shown by a large black dot. The leg
extends downward from this point at an angle θhip with respect to
vertical (shown in the figure as positive), and the leg bone forms an
angle ψ with respect to the webbing ribbon. The pivot point of the
hip is assumed to be horizontal from the bottom of the actuators
where the webbing exits, and the distance between these two

Fig. 2. Left, diagram of person wearing the system, showing the forces exerted
on the wearer by the device. The wearer’s body compresses at the thigh, waist,
and shoulder, the behavior of which is represented by the lumped stiffness kbody .
Right, model used to calculate the required motor displacement in order to apply a
specified moment Mhip at the hip as the hip moves.

points is denoted a. The distance between the hip pivot point and
the point at which the ribbon would intersect the femur bone, if it
continued through the leg tissue, is denoted l. As the user walks,
the perpendicular moment arm r between the ribbon and the hip
joint will vary due to θhip changing. The force on the webbing, F ,
and the moment arm r, combine to form the moment exerted on
the hip, Mhip .
The bottom right of the diagram shows the distances related
to the ribbon travel. In each case, these distances are along the
ribbon, which will change orientation as the wearer walks. xm is
the position of the ribbon at the actuator, with positive out of
the actuator (downward and to the right in the figure). xhip is the
position of the ribbon at the virtual point where it connects to the
femur, also with positive downward and to the right, with xhip = 0
when the hip is furthest in extension. In between, xs is the length
of the simulated spring representing the compliance of the leg
tissue kbody . While in reality the leg tissue is compressing, this is
equivalent to an extension spring extending backward from the
femur, and it is drawn as such in the model for simplicity. For each
of these positions, we ignore constant offsets since we are only
concerned with the net travel of the tissue and actuator.
The length of ribbon between the actuator and femur is defined
as:
lribbon =



a2 + l2 − 2al cos π /2 + θhip





(1)

The travel of the ribbon needed to follow the hip motion (xhip ) is

√

a function of this distance. Subtracting
0) = 0, we get:
xhip = lribbon −



a2 + l 2

a2 + l2 so that xhip (θhip =

(2)

To calculate the external moment Mhip that the hip exosuit is
capable of applying to the person, it is necessary to determine the
angle ψ between the thigh and the webbing.

A.T. Asbeck et al. / Robotics and Autonomous Systems 73 (2015) 102–110

105

Fig. 3. Measured stiffness of the suit-human system, determined by retracting the
webbing while holding the hip in a fixed vertical position and measuring the force
at the actuator unit. Three cycles of a sine wave actuation profile are shown with
thin black lines. Also shown is a quadratic line of best fit to the rising edge (thicker
dashed line).

Mhip = rF

(3)

r = l sin(ψ)

ψ = arccos
⇒

F =



(4)
l2 + l2ribbon − a2
2 l lribbon

Mhip
l sin(ψ)

.


(5)
(6)

Beyond modeling the geometric changes as the hip moves during walking, the stiffness of the body must be taken into account.
Intuitively, in addition to tracking the hip’s motion, to apply forces
the motor must retract the ribbon additionally to compress the
thigh tissue.
Experiments discussed in Section 3.2 found that the body
stiffness can be approximated by a second-order equation:
F (xs ) = p1 x2s + p2 xs .

(7)

For a force to be applied to the webbing, it must displace the
suit-human spring kbody :
F = p1 x2s + p2 xs ≡

⇒

xs =

−p 2
2p1

Mhip



+

(8)

l sin(ψ)
p2
2p1

2


+

Mhip
p1 l sin(ψ)



.

(9)

Finally, the motor position xm can be calculated from the sum
of the hip motion and the spring motion. According to the defined
coordinate frame, the motor position xm that is required to track
and apply forces to the hip can be calculated by:
xm = xhip − xs .

(10)

We use this modeled motor position to determine requirements
for the actuator units, and as a basis for generating motor trajectories in practice.
3.2. Measurements of suit-human stiffness
To determine the actual value of the lumped stiffness kbody , a
set of experiments were performed using the assembled device.
This and other human-subjects experiments in this paper were approved by the Harvard Institutional Review Board. For the protocol,
the wearer stood with the measured leg forward with their feet

Fig. 4. Top, biological hip moment profile vs. approximated profile, which is used
for the simulation after scaling by 31%. Hip extension moments are positive, which
corresponds to the muscles pulling the leg towards the posterior. Middle, resulting
position profiles of the hip (xhip ), spring (xs ), and motor (xm ) during ground level
walking. Here flexion positions are positive, which corresponds to the leg angled
towards the front of the body or the motor spooling out the ribbon. The spring
position is plotted with the spring extending being positive. Bottom, hip speed (vhip )
and motor speed (vm ) that is necessary both to track and to actuate the hip. All
graphs are shown as a function of percentage through the gait cycle, which extends
from one heel strike to the next.

40 cm apart as shown in the inset in Fig. 3, and the actuator was
commanded to retract the ribbon 16.5 cm and then release it following a sinusoidal profile at 0.5 Hz. The ribbon displacement was
determined experimentally so that a force of approximately 200 N
would be applied to the wearer. This was repeated three times, and
the results plotted in Fig. 3 with an offset removed where no force
was applied to the body.
The rising portion of the curve (corresponding to when the
actuator was pulling) was fitted to a quadratic equation, also
plotted in Fig. 3, resulting in the line of best fit:
F (xs ) = p1 x2s + p2 xs

(11)

p1 = 8899.7,

(12)

p2 = 99.546

where xs is in meters and F in Newtons.
3.3. Simulations
Using the model of the system and the measured body stiffness,
we next compute the required actuator travel in order to apply a
scaled version of the nominal hip moment to the body.
We begin with the nominal biological sagittal hip moment
for level-ground walking, duplicated from [33]. This is plotted in
Fig. 4(top) with respect to the percentage through the gait cycle,
which extends from one heel strike to the next for a given foot.
The biological moment begins slightly before heel strike to decelerate the leg, and peaks just after heel strike to prevent the leg from
collapsing as it accepts the weight of the body. We next form an approximated hip moment which is smoothed relative to the nominal
moment and is limited to positive (extensor) torques, also shown
in Fig. 4(top). This curve was constructed by selecting seven points

106

A.T. Asbeck et al. / Robotics and Autonomous Systems 73 (2015) 102–110

along the nominal moment profile to match the starting point,
peak, end point, and several relevant points in between, then interpolating and smoothing with a low-pass filter. It differs slightly
from the nominal moment between 90% and 100% in the gait cycle
to avoid rapid changes in force which an actuator would have difficulty following, and because a smooth moment profile will feel
more comfortable to the wearer. Since the exosuit is designed to
apply a partial assistance torque to the wearer, we then scale the
smoothed approximation by 31% for use in subsequent calculations. This scaling corresponds to a peak force of 145 N at the leg
for a 76 kg individual. When the smoothed approximation is scaled
by 31%, it is close in magnitude to the unscaled biological moment
between 90% and 100% in the gait cycle. We use this scaled approximation as Mhip in our model. Using this along with the nominal biological hip angle (not shown), also from [33], and plugging them
into Eqs. (1)–(8), we generate positions xhip , xs , and xm , with offsets
removed so that xhip reaches 0 when the hip is furthest back and xs
is zero when no force is applied. These are shown in Fig. 4(middle).
In these calculations, we use a = 0.32 m, l = 0.266 m, and we assume a gait period of 1.15 s which was empirically measured with
a subject walking on a treadmill at 1.25 m/s (2.8 mph).
In Fig. 4(middle), the hip position xhip starts at a large positive
value at heel strike (the leg is forward, in flexion) and decreases
until around halfway through the gait cycle when the leg is furthest
back, in extension, and then increases in value again. If the motor
were to perfectly track the hip’s motion, applying no force to
the ribbon, then the motor trajectory would follow this profile as
well. Instead, the motor must retract the ribbon additionally (more
negative values of xm in the plot) to generate force across the body’s
compliance. As indicated on the far left of the plot, the difference
in height between the hip position xhip and the motor position xm
is the amount the spring is extended (xs ). In the center of the gait
cycle, when the applied moment is zero, the simulation shows the
motor tracking the hip (xm = xhip ), as indicated in the figure.
In addition to the solid lines in the figure, a possible alternate
path for the motor position is shown in a red dashed line. This
line is above the hip position, which corresponds to slack in the
ribbon. Slack in the ribbon guarantees that the force is zero during
35%–85% in the gait cycle; if the actuators were tracking the leg
imperfectly, antagonistic forces could be applied to the leg during
that time. When operating the device in practice, we use a motor
trajectory similar to this that creates slack in the ribbon.
In Fig. 4(bottom), the resulting velocities of the ribbon at the
hip (vhip ) and motor (vm ) are plotted. The motor velocity at around
90% in the gait cycle shows that a speed of 0.95 m/s is required to
compress the body’s compliance and apply the specified moment
to the hip. For comparison, if the body was extremely stiff, the
actuators would have to follow a path very close to that of the hip
itself, and thus have a velocity of vhip . To track the hip’s motion, this
would require a speed of 0.67 m/s, which occurs at around 70% in
the gait cycle when no force is on the ribbon. During the period
when force is applied to the ribbon, the maximum speed of the leg
is only 0.32 m/s, a value much slower than 0.95 m/s. In summary,
a major effect of the body’s compliance is to increase the required
motor speed for applying forces by more than a factor of two.
One interesting point is how to optimize the positioning of
the ribbon with respect to the hip joint. The simulation assumed
relatively large distances between the actuator and the hip joint
(a = 0.32 m) and the distance down the leg (l = 0.266 m). It is
interesting to consider what would happen if these distances were
varied. This analysis is illustrated in Fig. 5, which shows the peak
force F and peak motor velocity vm required to achieve the approximated moment profile in Fig. 4 as distances a and l are varied.
According to the measured stiffness data, the body’s compliance
requires 12 cm of ribbon travel to achieve 145 N of force. This
displacement would likely be similar if the distances a and l

Fig. 5. Peak force F (top) and peak motor velocity vm (bottom) required to produce
the approximated hip moment shown in Fig. 4 after it is scaled as distances a and l
are varied. As the distance between the ribbon and the hip joint increases (a and l
increase), the required peak force goes down. The required motor velocity decreases
up to a certain point due to the motor being more able to compress the body’s
compliance. For large values of a and l, the peak motor velocity increases due to
the necessity of tracking the leg at 70% in the gait cycle. The values of a and l used
in the device are shown by an asterisk in each plot.

were changed, since the combined stiffness of the leg, waist, and
shoulder is largely independent of the strap’s positioning on the
leg. For small values of a and l, in the bottom left corner of the plots,
larger ribbon forces are required because the moment arm about
the hip has been reduced. The motor velocities are also increased,
because the larger forces require additional displacement of the
body’s compliance, and it must occur in the same amount of time as
before. The motor would then be much faster than needed in order
to track the hip’s motion, which would be slower by a factor of two
due to the smaller moment arm. Thus, smaller values of a and l
result in a higher peak motor power and a mismatch in required
motor speeds at different points in the gait cycle.
For larger values of a and l, the force decreases monotonically
as the radius between the ribbon and hip joint increases. The peak
motor velocity also decreases as a and l increase, but only up to a
point. In the top right corner of the plot, with large values of a and l,
higher motor velocities are again needed, but now in order to track
the hip’s motion at around 70% in the gait cycle. In this region, the
motor power during the pull phase is reduced, but the motor may
be required to move faster than desired. The minimum required
motor velocity corresponds to a ribbon position which results
in near-equal speeds for compressing the body’s compliance and
tracking the joint’s motion.
The values of a and l used in our device are close to this
point, and were prevented from being any larger due to practical
concerns. The thigh brace was made tall (20 cm) to distribute the
force broadly over the wearer’s thigh, which limited the maximum
possible value of l. Similarly, the value of a was restricted to prevent
the device from protruding too far from the wearer.
For the device we constructed, we chose a maximum speed
of 0.75 m/s to design towards, slightly slower than the 0.95 m/s
predicted by the simulation, in order that the peak force delivered
to the body might be slightly higher than would be possible with
a 0.95 m/s peak speed. This slower speed means that the position

A.T. Asbeck et al. / Robotics and Autonomous Systems 73 (2015) 102–110

107

Fig. 6. Left, assembled actuation unit, and center, view of the inside. Right, diagram
of the pulley system, which measures the ribbon force F indirectly by measuring Fr .
1 - spool; 2 - idler; 3 - feeder system; 4 - cantilever load cell (Phidgets 20 kg Micro
Load Cell); 5 - timing pulley; 6 - Maxon EC 4-pole 30 motor plus 32 mm gearbox.

and force pulse will be slightly more spread out as compared to
the simulated one. This speed is still capable of tracking the hip’s
motion, however, which only requires a speed of 0.67 m/s.
4. Mechanical design
Following our determination of the required ribbon speed at the
motor, we can design the actuator accordingly. We first present
the overall design of the actuator unit, and then discuss the ribbon
spool and the electrical design.
4.1. Overall design
A rendering of the actuator unit is shown in Fig. 6. The unit
consists of a geared motor (6) connected to the spool (1) that winds
up the webbing ribbon via a timing belt (5). After exiting the spool,
the ribbon passes over an idler pulley connected to two cantileverstyle load cells (4) before exiting the unit through a feeder system
(3) comprised of two additional idlers. In addition to guiding the
ribbon, this system of idlers and load cells is used to detect the force
in the ribbon, as shown in the far right of Fig. 6. The ribbon passes
over the instrumented idler at an angle β on each side, so that when
the ribbon pulls with force F , a horizontal force Fr is induced on the
instrumented idler. By measuring this force with a load cell on each
side of the idler, the ribbon force can be computed via
F =

Fr
2 sin(β)

(13)

where Fr is the sum of the readings from the two load cells. The load
cells achieve an accurate reading of the ribbon force because the
friction in the feeder system is low, and the ribbon does not contact
anything between the feeder and where it attaches to the leg.

rspool (φ) =

4.2. Ribbon spool
The actuator functions by winding up webbing onto a spool, depicted in Fig. 7(top). The spool has a minimum usable radius rs,min , a
maximum radius rs,max , and the webbing has thickness twebbing . The
webbing exiting the spool is at position xm and pulls with force F ,
as previously discussed. The shape of the webbing in the spool is
an Archimedes’ spiral [34], with radius r a function of the angle
the webbing forms around the spool φ . In general, an Archimedes
spiral has the equation
r (φ) = αφ.

Fig. 7. Top, diagram of the spool depicting the relevant variables. Middle, plot of
how the spool radius varies as a function of the number of rotations of the spool
for various ribbon thicknesses. Data are normalized to be fractions of the maximum
spool radius rmax . Bottom, webbing speed and force as a function of spool radius in
our actuators.

(14)

In our situation, we have α = twebbing /(2π ), the spool has
a minimum radius rs,min , and we denote the radius at which the
webbing exits the spool rspool , resulting in

twebbing
2π

φ + rs,min .

(15)

If the spool rotates at angular velocity ω =
velocity of the webbing exiting the spool is

v = rspool ω =

twebbing

φ

φ

+ rspool,min

dφ
,
dt

φ

2π
dt
dt
and the arc length between rs,min and rspool is
s(φspool ) =

twebbing
4π



the linear

(16)


(φspool + c ) 1 + (φspool + c )2




+ ln (φspool + c ) + 1 + (φspool + c )2


− c 1+

c2

+ ln c +



1+


c2

(17)

108

A.T. Asbeck et al. / Robotics and Autonomous Systems 73 (2015) 102–110

approximately 18 cm of ribbon travel, which is more than enough
to actuate the hip during level-ground walking. This means that the
change in radius during walking (and hence velocity) is less than
5% throughout the gait cycle. The minimum and maximum values
of our spool radius correspond to 1.98 wraps around the spool and
35.8 cm of ribbon travel. This travel gives extra room for adjusting
the device to different sizes of individual as well as permitting the
actuators to feed out enough ribbon to permit the wearer to bring
their knee to their chest, which requires 25 cm of ribbon.
The gear reduction can be computed after the spool radius is
determined. The encoder on the motor is limited to 12,000 rpm =
1256.6 rad/s. With the output spool at its minimum radius of
2.75 cm, and a required ribbon velocity of 0.75 m/s, the output
spool must have an angular velocity of ω = v/rspool = 27.27 rad/s.
This gives a required gear reduction of 46.07:1 between the
motor and output spool. We choose a gearbox of 23:1 and use a
timing belt to give another 2:1 reduction to achieve 46:1 for the
combination.
To compute the expected ribbon force at the output of the
actuator, we estimate the efficiency of the drive train components.
The Maxon 32 mm 23:1 gearbox has a quoted efficiency of 75%,
the timing belt is assumed to have an efficiency of 95%, and the
other idler pulleys and friction with the feeder have an assumed
efficiency of 90%–95%. This combines to make a total mechanical
efficiency of 64.1%–67.7%. With a motor torque of 0.14 N m, this
leads to a torque at the minimum spool radius of 4.128 N m and a
force on the ribbon of 150 N. The final ribbon speed and force are
plotted as a function of spool radius in Fig. 7(bottom).

Fig. 8. Electronics block diagram.

where
c=

2π
twebbing

rs,min .

(18)

These equations are derived by taking the arc length of an
Archimedes’ spiral from [34], substituting in the appropriate
variables for our application, and subtracting the equivalent arc
length of the center of the spool (r < rs,min ).
Since the spool will change radius as it winds up or feeds out
the ribbon, the velocity of the ribbon and torque produced by the
actuator will change slightly over time. Fig. 7(middle) examines
how the radius changes for a generic spool as a function of several
parameters. The x-axis of this plot shows the rotations of a sample
spool, with a fully-wound spool at radius rs,max having N turns,
and each tick mark to the left of that corresponding to one fewer
winding of ribbon around the spool. On the vertical axis, the
radius of the spool is plotted as a fraction of the maximum spool
radius. The plot shows results for several different thicknesses of
ribbon: the top line shows a very thin ribbon of thickness 0.01rs,max
while the bottom line shows a thick ribbon (relative to the spool
maximum radius) of 0.1rs,max . For the thinnest ribbon shown, the
radius varies by only 5% over five rotations of the spool, while for
the thickest ribbon shown it varies by 50%. Since the velocity of
the ribbon exiting the spool is proportional to the spool radius for
a constant angular velocity, this graph can also be used directly
to understand the variation in velocity with a spooled ribbon. For
most systems, a thin ribbon is desired so the velocity and torque
will not vary significantly (<10%) during operation.
4.2.1. Parameters for our system
Our device uses seatbelt webbing for the ribbon, which has
a thickness of twebbing = 1.26 mm. We chose a spool radius
with rs,min = 2.75 cm and rs,max = 3 cm. The minimum radius
is large enough to provide space inside the spool to secure the
webbing to the spool, and so that the ribbon velocity is relatively
constant. The size also minimizes the inertia of the spool. With
these numbers, twebbing = 0.042rs,max , which would be located on
Fig. 7(middle) just above the twebbing = 0.05rs,max line. The spool
radius is large enough that one rotation of the spool corresponds to

4.3. Electronics overview
A block diagram of the electronics is shown in Fig. 8. An Aurora
PC104 realtime computer running Matlab xPC Target is the primary
controller. The PC104 reads in the amplified load cell signals and
the footswitches, and sends an analog position control signal to an
mbed LCP1768 microcontroller which acts as a communications
module. This in turn runs a position controller, and uses a CAN
bus to transmit desired motor currents to the Roboteq SBL1360
motor controllers. To complete the feedback loop, the motor
controllers transmit the motor encoder readings back to the mbed
communications module, which then converts them to an analog
signal and sends them back to the PC104 for logging.
5. Results
For preliminary walking experiments, we used footswitches
to segment the gait, and a position controller to move the
ribbon spool through a trajectory at specified times in the gait
cycle. Following our calculations of xm in Section 3.3, we form
a position trajectory profile by using a triangular pulse with a
similar amplitude as xm (12.3 cm actual vs. 11.8 cm xm ) and similar
timing, but with the motor acceleration- and velocity-limited to
3500 rotations/s2 and 12,000 rpm, respectively. The resulting
profile extends from 80% to 25% in the gait cycle. The controller
maintains a buffer of the last 5 footstrike times and computes the
average gait period. It assumes the wearer is walking at a constant
velocity, and uses the average gait period to estimate when they
are at 80% in the gait cycle. At that point, the motor executes the
position-controlled motor trajectory, which creates a force in the
ribbon through the compliance of the body. This scheme depends
on the wearer walking at a constant cadence in order to have the
motor’s pull line up well with the biological hip moment. Even so,
this simple control scheme is useful for determining the behavior
of the device.
Results from an individual wearing the system while walking at
1.25m/s (2.8 mph) are shown in Fig. 9. In this figure, we compare

A.T. Asbeck et al. / Robotics and Autonomous Systems 73 (2015) 102–110

Fig. 9. Results for one leg for a subject walking at 1.25m/s (2.8 mph). Top, graph of
motor position xm used in the experiment, and simulated xhip and xs . Bottom, graph
of measured force in the ribbon with standard deviation as compared to simulated
force using the model.

simulated data with measured data to validate the model. For
the simulated data, we use the reference hip angle θhip from [33],
lengths a and l measured on the subject, and the actual motor
trajectory xm . These are used with the model developed in Section 3
to calculate the resulting webbing force and hip position. In
the figure, the top graph shows the actual motor trajectory xm
along with the simulated hip position xhip and spring length xs .
The bottom plot shows the simulated force as compared to the
measured force and its standard deviation.
As shown in the bottom graph, in practice the device achieves
9% less force (133 N vs. 146 N) despite 0.5 mm additional cable
travel as compared to the simulation. This difference is likely due to
additional torso lean which occurs during walking, especially when
the force is applied at the shoulder. The measured force also drops
off faster than the simulated force; this is likely due to the fact that
the model did not include the hysteresis in the body-suit stiffness
curve. In general, though, the model fits the measured data well.
The resulting assistive pulses of force feel natural due to their
being aligned well with the nominal biological torques. During the
period of force application, the leg is approximately at a constant
angle of Ψ = 35°, which also can be seen from the approximately
constant position of xhip in Fig. 9 from 90% to 15% in the gait cycle.
At this angle, the thigh brace pulls up along the leg as well as
backward. This does result in some translation of the thigh brace
vertically along the leg, but this motion is minimal due to the
conical shape of the thigh just above the knee. If the thigh brace
is initially wrapped snugly around the thigh, there is no motion
between the skin and thigh brace, making it comfortable to wear
during actuation for the level of force we propose to apply.
6. Conclusion
In conclusion, we have modeled and designed an exosuit that
effectively applies moments to the hip joint, contributing up to
30% of the nominal biological moment for walking. The design
does not restrict the hip’s motion with rigid linkages, but relies
on the bone structure to support compressive forces across the

109

joint. Substantial forces can be applied to the leg through the
soft interface, and the limiting factor is not the comfort of the
system but the available motor power. The soft interface does
have substantial compliance, which requires higher motor speeds
compared to a rigid system. Compared to classical exoskeletons,
the system is lighter and less restrictive to the wearer’s motion.
In addition, it can be put on and taken off very rapidly or simply
disengaged from the wearer while assistance is not required. While
having these advantages, the system is limited in the amount of
assistance that can be applied to the wearer and uses a single motor
that only assists unidirectionally (in that it assists hip extension
but not flexion). However, we believe this will be sufficient for
improving walking economy.
For the current control strategy, we assumed that an appropriate torque profile to apply to the hip was a scaled version of the biological joint moment, but further work is required to validate this.
For assistive applications such as hiking or load carriage, it may be
beneficial to provide the wearer with as much power as possible.
For rehabilitation, individuals may require moment profiles specific to their particular injury. If a scaled biological joint moment is
indeed best, increasing the speed and bandwidth of the actuation
system would be useful to duplicate this moment more precisely,
since the device currently provides a smoothed version of the biological moment. At force levels higher than those used currently,
matching the biological moment may be especially important. Increasing the bandwidth of the actuators could also permit using
force-control instead of a position-control scheme. Improving the
control scheme will be a major thrust of future work, so the system
can adapt on a per-step basis to changes in gait. Adding additional
sensors such as gyroscopes to estimate the hip angle over time may
be useful. Further testing of the system is also necessary to determine its effect on gait, both kinematically and metabolically.
In future work, the system will be made significantly lighter and
smaller, so that it can be packaged compactly to fit onto a hiking
backpack or orthosis supporting the trunk. Further optimization
will also be performed to select the vertical height of the actuators
with respect to the hip joint to maximize the overall efficiency.
The current design allows a person to sit down while wearing
the device, but positioning the actuators lower may improve the
stiffness and increase the moments transmitted to the joints.
Alternately, for some applications a lower-profile unit that could be
worn under clothing may be beneficial. In all of these situations, the
ability to provide moments at the hip through a compliant, nonrestrictive mechanism should be very useful.
Acknowledgments
This material is based upon work supported by the Defense
Advanced Research Projects Agency (DARPA), Warrior Web Program (Contract No. W911QX-12-C-0084). The views and conclusions contained in this document are those of the authors and
should not be interpreted as representing the official policies, either expressly or implied, of DARPA or the U.S. Government.
This work was also partially funded by the Wyss Institute for
Biologically Inspired Engineering at Harvard University.
References
[1] A. Chu, H. Kazerooni, A. Zoss, On the biomimetic design of the Berkeley
lower extremity exoskeleton (bleex), in: Robotics and Automation, 2005. ICRA
2005. Proceedings of the 2005 IEEE International Conference on, IEEE, 2005,
pp. 4345–4352.
[2] H. Kazerooni, R. Steger, The Berkeley lower extremity exoskeleton, J. Dyn. Syst.
Meas. Control 128 (2006) 14.
[3] C. Walsh, K. Endo, H. Herr, A quasi-passive leg exoskeleton for load-carrying
augmentation, Int. J. Humanoid Robot. 4 (03) (2007) 487–506.
[4] E. Garcia, J.M. Sater, J. Main, Exoskeletons for human performance augmentation (EHPA): A program summary, J. Robot. Soc. Japan 20 (8) (2002) 44–48.

110

A.T. Asbeck et al. / Robotics and Autonomous Systems 73 (2015) 102–110

[5] A. Esquenazi, M. Talaty, A. Packel, M. Saulino, The ReWalk powered
exoskeleton to restore ambulatory function to individuals with thoracic-level
motor-complete spinal cord injury, Am. J. Phys. Med. Rehabil. 91 (11) (2012)
911–921.
[6] P.D. Neuhaus, J.H. Noorden, T.J. Craig, T. Torres, J. Kirschbaum, J.E. Pratt, Design
and evaluation of Mina: A robotic orthosis for paraplegics, in: Rehabilitation
Robotics (ICORR), in: 2011 IEEE International Conference on, IEEE, 2011,
pp. 1–8.
[7] H. Yano, S. Kaneko, K. Nakazawa, S. Yamamoto, A. Bettoh, A new concept of
dynamic orthosis for paraplegia: the weight bearing control (wbc) orthosis,
Prosthet. Orthot. Int. 21 (3) (1997) 222–228.
[8] B.J. Ruthenberg, N.A. Wasylewski, J.E. Beard, An experimental device for
investigating the force and power requirements of a powered gait orthosis,
J. Rehabil. Res. Dev. 34 (1997) 203–214.
[9] Y. Ohta, H. Yano, R. Suzuki, M. Yoshida, N. Kawashima, K. Nakazawa, A
two-degree-of-freedom motor-powered gait orthosis for spinal cord injury
patients, Proc. Inst. Mech. Eng., Part H: J. Eng. Med. 221 (6) (2007) 629–639.
[10] K.A. Strausser, T.A. Swift, A.B. Zoss, H. Kazerooni, B.C. Bennett, Mobile
Exoskeleton for Spinal Cord Injury: Development and Testing, ASME, 2011.
[11] H. Kawamoto, Y. Sankai, Power assist system HAL-3 for gait disorder
person, in: Computers Helping People with Special Needs, Springer, 2002,
pp. 196–203.
[12] A. Dollar, H. Herr, Lower extremity exoskeletons and active orthoses:
Challenges and state-of-the-art, IEEE Trans. Robot. 24 (1) (2008) 144–158.
[13] H.A. Quintero, R.J. Farris, C. Hartigan, I. Clesson, M. Goldfarb, A powered lower
limb orthosis for providing legged mobility in paraplegic individuals, Top.
Spinal Cord Injury Rehabil. 17 (1) (2011) 25–33.
[14] M. Arazpour, A. Chitsazan, S.W. Hutchins, F.T. Ghomshe, M.E. Mousavi, E.E.
Takamjani, G. Aminian, M. Rahgozar, M.A. Bani, Design and simulation of a
new powered gait orthosis for paraplegic patients, Prosthet. Orthot. Int. 36 (1)
(2012) 125–130.
[15] M.L. Audu, C.S. To, R. Kobetic, R.J. Triolo, Gait evaluation of a novel hip
constraint orthosis with implication for walking in paraplegia, IEEE Trans.
Neural Syst. Rehabil. Eng. 18 (6) (2010) 610–618.
[16] B.G. do Nascimento, C.B.S. Vimieiro, D.A.P. Nagem, M. Pinotti, Hip orthosis
powered by pneumatic artifcial muscle: Voluntary activation in absence of
myoelectrical signal, Artif. Organs 32 (4) (2008) 317–322.
[17] C. Vimieiro, B.G. do Nascimento, D.A.P. Nagem, M. Pinotti, Development of a
hip orthosis using pneumatic artificial muscles, in: Technology Meets Surgery
International, Sao Paulo, Brazil, 2005.
[18] C.L. Lewis, D.P. Ferris, Invariant hip moment pattern while walking with a
robotic hip exoskeleton, J. Biomech. 44 (2011) 789–793.
[19] J.A. Blaya, H. Herr, Adaptive control of a variable-impedance ankle–foot
orthosis to assist drop-foot gait, IEEE Trans. Neural Syst. Rehabil. Eng. 12 (1)
(2004) 24–31.
[20] G.S. Sawicki, D.P. Ferris, Powered ankle exoskeletons reveal the metabolic
cost of plantar flexor mechanical work during walking with longer steps at
constant step frequency, J. Exp. Biol. 212 (1) (2009) 21–31.
[21] K. Yasuhara, K. Shimada, T. Koyama, T. Ido, K. Kikuchi, Y. Endo, Walking assist
device with stride management system, Honda R&D Tech. Rev. 21 (2) (2009).
[22] Honda walking assist device with stride management system,
http://corporate.honda.com/innovation/walk-assist/, 2013
(accessed 20.12.13).
[23] M. Wehner, B. Quinlivan, P.M. Aubin, E. Martinez-Villalpando, M. Bauman, L.
Stirling, K. Holt, R. Wood, C. Walsh, Design and evaluation of a lightweight soft
exosuit for gait assistance, in: Robotics and Automation, 2013. Proceedings.
ICRA’13. 2013 IEEE International Conference on, IEEE, 2013.
[24] A.T. Asbeck, R. Dyer, A. Larusson, C.J. Walsh, Biologically-inspired soft exosuit,
in: Rehabilitation Robotics (ICORR), in: 2013 IEEE International Conference on,
IEEE, 2013.
[25] T. Kawamura, K. Takanaka, T. Nakamura, H. Osumi, Development of an orthosis
for walking assistance using pneumatic artificial muscle: A quantitative
assessment of the effect of assistance, in: Rehabilitation Robotics (ICORR),
2013 IEEE International Conference on, IEEE, 2013, pp. 1–6.
[26] T. Tanaka, Y. Satoh, S. Kaneko, Y. Suzuki, N. Sakamoto, S. Seki, Smart suit:
Soft power suit with semi-active assist mechanism-prototype for supporting
waist and knee joint, in: Control, Automation and Systems, 2008. ICCAS 2008.
International Conference on, IEEE, 2008, pp. 2002–2005.

[27] Y. Imamura, T. Tanaka, Y. Suzuki, K. Takizawa, M. Yamanaka, Motion-based
design of elastic belts for passive assistive device using musculoskeletal model,
in: Robotics and Biomimetics (ROBIO), 2011 IEEE International Conference on,
IEEE, 2011, pp. 1343–1348.
[28] H. Kobayashi, H. Nozaki, Development of anteversion posture support
system, in: Robotics and Biomimetics, 2008. ROBIO 2008. IEEE International
Conference on, IEEE, 2009, pp. 682–686.
[29] J.G. Fontaine, Retracting device for automobile seat belts, US Patent 3,199,804
(10 Aug 1965).
[30] E.E. Paananen, L.C. Csengery, R.J. Barry, Magnetic tape drive, US Patent
3,764,087 (9 Oct 1973).
[31] H. Koselka, B.A. Wallach, D. Gollaher, Autonomous floor mopping apparatus,
US Patent 6,741,054 (25 May 2004).
[32] H. Zhu, C. Butts, M. Lamb, P. Blankenship, An implement to install and retrieve
surface drip irrigation laterals, Appl. Eng. Agric. 20 (1) (2004) 17–24.
[33] A.N. Lay, C.J. Hass, R.J. Gregor, The effects of sloped surfaces on locomotion: a
kinematic and kinetic analysis, J. Biomech. 39 (9) (2006) 1621–1628.
[34] E.W. Weisstein, Archimedes’ spiral,
http://mathworld.wolfram.com/ArchimedesSpiral.html, 2014 (accessed Jan
2014).

Alan T. Asbeck received the S.B. degree in electrical engineering in 2002 and the S.B. and M.Eng. degrees in
physics and electrical engineering, respectively, from the
Massachusetts Institute of Technology, MA, in 2003. He
received the Ph.D. degree in electrical engineering from
Stanford University, CA, in 2010. He is currently a Postdoctoral Researcher at the Wyss Institute for Biologically
Inspired Engineering at Harvard University in Cambridge,
MA. His research interests include mechanism design,
wearable and bio-inspired robotics, and rapid prototyping.

Kai Schmidt received his Bachelor’s degree in Mechanical
Engineering from the Technical University of Berlin, Germany, in October 2011. He subsequently pursued his Master’s degree in Mechanical Engineering at the Technical
University Berlin, finishing in January 2014. Kai Schmidt
is currently a research fellow at the Wyss Institute for Biologically Inspired Engineering at Harvard University. His
research interests include mechanical design, robotics and
control.

Conor James Walsh received his B.A.I and B.A. degrees in
Mechanical and Manufacturing engineering from Trinity
College Dublin, Ireland in 2003 and an M.S. degree and
Ph.D. in Mechanical Engineering from the Massachusetts
Institute of Technology in 2006 and 2010 with a minor
in entrepreneurship through the Sloan School of Management and also a Certificate in Medical Science through the
Harvard-MIT Division of Health Sciences and Technology.
During his time at MIT, he received the Whitaker Health
Sciences Fund Fellowship as well as numerous other design, entrepreneurship and mentoring awards. He is an Assistant Professor in the Harvard School of Engineering and Applied Sciences and a
core faculty member at the Wyss Institute for Biologically Inspired Engineering at
Harvard University. His research efforts are at the intersection of science, engineering and medicine with a focus on developing smart medical devices for diagnostic,
therapeutic, and assistive applications.

